<p class='line'>AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
<p class='line'>TO</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
<p class='line'>FATHER HAMILTON COWPER JOHNSON</p>

<div><h1 id='chap01'>THE FACE ON THE WATERLOO STEPS</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>From Waterloo Station to the small country
town of Ramsgard in Dorset is a journey of not more
than three or four hours, but having by good luck
found a compartment to himself, Wolf Solent was able
to indulge in such an orgy of concentrated thought, that
these three or four hours lengthened themselves out into
something beyond all human measurement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A bluebottle fly buzzed up and down above his head,
every now and then settling on one of the coloured advertisements
of seaside resorts—Weymouth, Swanage, Lulworth,
and Poole—cleaning its front legs upon the masts
of painted ships or upon the sands of impossibly cerulean
waters.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Through the open window near which he sat, facing
the engine, the sweet airs of an unusually relaxed March
morning visited his nostrils, carrying fragrances of
young green shoots, of wet muddy ditches, of hazel-copses
full of damp moss, and of primroses on warm grassy
hedge-banks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Solent was not an ill-favoured man; but on the other
hand he was not a prepossessing one. His short stubbly
hair was of a bleached tow-colour. His forehead as well
as his rather shapeless chin had a tendency to slope
backward, a peculiarity which had the effect of throwing
the weight of his character upon the curve of his hooked
nose and upon the rough, thick eyebrows that overarched
his deeply sunken grey eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was tall and lean; and as he stretched out his legs
and clasped his hands in front of him and bowed his
head over his bony wrists, it would have been difficult
to tell whether the goblinish grimaces that occasionally
wrinkled his physiognomy were fits of sardonic chuckling
or spasms of reckless desperation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mood, whatever its elements may have been, was
obviously connected with a crumpled letter which he
more than once drew forth from his side-pocket, rapidly
glanced over, and replaced, only to relapse into the same
pose as before.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The letter which thus affected him was written in a
meticulously small hand and ran as follows:</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='noindent'><span class='sc'>My Dear Sir</span>:—</p>

<p class='pindent'>Will you be so kind as to arrive at Ramsgard on Thursday
in time to meet my friend Mr. Darnley Otter about five o’clock
in the tea-room of the Lovelace Hotel? He will be driving over
to King’s Barton that afternoon and will convey you to his
mother’s house, where for the present you will have your room.
If it is convenient I would regard it as a favour if you will come
up and dine with me on the night of your arrival. I dine at
eight o’clock; and we shall be able to talk things over.</p>

<p class='pindent'>I must again express my pleasure at your so prompt acceptance
of my poor offer.</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:left;margin-left:9em;'>Yours faithfully,</p>
<p class='line' style='text-align:left;margin-left:13em;'><span class='it'>John Urquhart</span>.</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>He re-invoked the extraordinary incident which had
led to his “prompt acceptance” of Mr. Urquhart’s “poor
offer.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was now thirty-five and for ten years he had laboriously
taught History at a small institution in the city
of London, living peacefully under the despotic affection
of his mother, with whom, when he was only a child of
ten, he had left Dorsetshire, and along with Dorsetshire
all the agitating memories of his dead father.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As it happened, his new post, as literary assistant to
the Squire of King’s Barton, brought him to the very
scene of these disturbing memories; for it was from a
respectable position as History Master in Ramsgard
School that his father had descended, by a series of
mysterious headlong plunges, until he lay dead in the
cemetery of that town, a byword of scandalous depravity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was only the fact that the Squire of King’s Barton
was a relative of Lord Carfax, a cousin of Wolf’s mother,
that had made it possible for him to find a retreat, suitable
to his not very comprehensive abilities, after the
astounding <span class='it'>dénouement</span> of his London life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He could visualize now, as if it had occurred that very
day instead of two months ago, the outraged anger upon
his mother’s face, when he communicated to her what
had happened. He had danced his “malice-dance”—that
is how he himself expressed it—in the middle of an
innocent discourse on the reign of Queen Anne. He was
telling his pupils quite quietly about Dean Swift; and
all of a sudden some mental screen or lid or dam in his
own mind completely collapsed and he found himself
pouring forth a torrent of wild, indecent invectives
upon every aspect of modern civilization.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had, in fact, so at least he told his mother, danced
his “malice-dance” on that quiet platform to so abandoned
a tune, that no “authorities,” in so far as they
retained their natural instincts at all, could possibly
condone it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And now, with that event behind him, he was escaping
from the weight of maternal disapproval into the very
region where the grand disaster of his mother’s life
had occurred.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They had had some very turbulent scenes after the
receipt of Mr. Urquhart’s first answer to his appeal.
But as she had no income and only very limited savings,
the sheer weight of economic necessity drove her into
submission.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You shall come down to me there when I’ve got a
cottage,” he had flung out; and her agitated, handsome
face, beneath its disordered mass of wavy, grey hair,
had hardened itself under the impact of those words, as
if he had taken up her most precious tea-set and dashed
it into fragments at her feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One of the suppressed emotions that had burst forth
on that January afternoon had had to do with the appalling
misery of so many of his fellow Londoners. He
recalled the figure of a man he had seen on the steps
outside Waterloo Station. The inert despair upon the
face that this figure had turned towards him came between
him now and a hillside covered with budding
beeches. The face was repeated many times among those
great curving masses of emerald-clear foliage. It was
an English face; and it was also a Chinese face, a Russian
face, an Indian face. It had the variableness of that
Protean wine of the priestess Bacbuc. It was just the
face of a man, of a mortal man against whom Providence
had grown as malignant as a mad dog. And the woe
upon the face was of such a character that Wolf knew
at once that no conceivable social readjustments or
ameliorative revolutions could ever atone for it—could
ever make up for the simple irremediable fact that it
<span class='it'>had</span> been as it had been!</p>

<p class='pindent'>By the time the hill of beeches had disappeared, he
caught sight of a powerful motor-lorry clanging its way
along a narrow road, leaving a cloud of dust behind it,
and the sight of this thing gave his thought a new direction.
There arose before him, complicated and inhuman,
like a moving tower of instruments and appliances,
the monstrous Apparition of Modern Invention.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt as though, with aeroplanes spying down upon
every retreat like ubiquitous vultures, with the lanes invaded
by iron-clad motors like colossal beetles, with no
sea, no lake, no river, free from throbbing, thudding engines,
the one thing most precious of all in the world
was being steadily assassinated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the dusty, sunlit space of that small tobacco-stained
carriage, he seemed to see, floating and helpless,
an image of the whole round earth! And he saw it bleeding
and victimized, like a smooth-bellied, vivisected
frog. He saw it scooped and gouged and scraped and
harrowed. He saw it hawked at out of the humming air.
He saw it netted in a quivering entanglement of vibrations,
heaving and shuddering under the weight of iron
and stone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Where, he asked himself, as for the twentieth time he
took out and put back Mr. Urquhart’s letter—where, in
such a vivisected frog’s-belly of a world, would there
be a place left for a person to think any single thought
that was leisurely and easy? And, as he asked himself
this and mentally formed a visual image of what he
considered “thought,” such “thought” took the form of
slowly stirring, vegetable leaves, big as elephants’ feet,
hanging from succulent and cold stalks on the edges of
woodland swamps.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then, stretching out his legs still further and
leaning back against the dusty cushions, he set himself
to measure the resources of his spirit against these accursed
mechanisms. He did this quite gravely, with no
comic uneasiness at the arrogance of such a proceeding.
Why should he not pit his individual magnetic strength
against the tyrannous machinery invented by other men?</p>

<p class='pindent'>In fact, the thrill of malicious exultation that passed
through his nerves as he thought of these things had a
curious resemblance to the strange ecstasy he used to
derive from certain godlike mythological legends. He
would never have confessed to any living person the
intoxicating enlargement of personality that used to come
to him from imagining himself a sort of demiurgic force,
drawing its power from the heart of Nature herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And it was just that sort of enlargement he experienced
now, when he felt the mysterious depths of his
soul stirred and excited by his defiance of these modern
inventions. It was not as though he fell back on any
traditional archaic obstinacy. What he fell back upon
was a crafty, elusive cunning of his own, a cunning both
slippery and serpentine, a cunning that could flow like
air, sink like rain-water, rise like green sap, root itself
like invisible spores of moss, float like filmy pond-scum,
yield and retreat, retreat and yield, yet remain unconquered
and inviolable!</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he stared out the open window and watched each
span of telegraph-wires sink slowly down till the next
telegraph-post pulled them upward with a jerk, he indulged
himself in a sensation which always gave him a
peculiar pleasure, the sensation of imagining himself to
be a prehistoric giant who with an effortless ease ran
along by the side of the train, leaping over hedges,
ditches, lanes, and ponds, and easily rivalled, in natural-born
silent speed, the noisy mechanism of all those pistons
and cog-wheels!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt himself watching this other-self, this leaping
giant, with the positive satisfaction of a hooded snake,
thrusting out a flickering forked tongue from coils that
shimmered in the sun. And yet as the train rushed forward,
it seemed to him as if his real self were neither
giant nor snake; but rather that black-budded ash-tree,
still in the rearward of its leafy companions, whose
hushed grey branches threw so contorted a shadow upon
the railway bank.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Soon the train that carried him ran rapidly past the
queer-looking tower of Basingstoke church, and his
thoughts took yet another turn. There was a tethered
cow eating grass in the churchyard; and as for the space
of a quarter of a minute he watched this cow, it gathered
to itself such an inviolable placidity that its feet seemed
planted in a green pool of quietness that was older than
life itself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the Basingstoke church-tower substituted itself
for the image of the cow; and it seemed to Solent as
though all the religions in the world were nothing but so
many creaking and splashing barges, whereon the souls
of men ferried themselves over those lakes of primal
silence, disturbing the swaying water-plants that grew
there and driving away the shy water-fowl!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He told himself that every church-tower in the land
overlooked a graveyard, and that in every graveyard
was a vast empty grave waiting for the “Jealous Father
of Men” who lived in the church. He knew there was
just such a church-tower at King’s Barton, and another
one at Ramsgard, and yet another at Blacksod, the town
on the further side of Mr. Urquhart’s village.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He sat very upright now, as the train approached
Andover; and the idea came into his head, as he fixed
his gaze on his fellow traveller, the bluebottle fly, who
was cleaning his front legs on a picture of Swanage
pier, that from tower to tower of these West Country
churches there might be sent, one gusty November
night, a long-drawn melancholy cry, a cry heard only
by dogs and horses and geese and cattle and village-idiots,
the real death-cry of a god—dead at last of extreme
old age!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Christ is different from God,” he said to himself.
“Only when God is really dead will Christ be known
for what He is. Christ will take the place of God then.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As a sort of deliberate retort to these wild fancies,
the tall spire of Salisbury Cathedral rose suddenly before
him. Here the train stopped; and though even here—possibly
because his absorption in his thoughts gave
him a morose and uncongenial appearance—no one entered
his third-class carriage, the stream of his cogitations
began to grow less turbid, less violent, less destructive.
The austerity of Salisbury Plain yielded now
to the glamour of Blackmore Vale. Dairy-farms took the
place of sheep-farms; lush pastures, of bare chalk-downs;
enclosed orchards, of open cornfields; and park-like
moss-grown oaks, of wind-swept naked thorn-bushes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The green, heavily-grassed meadows through which the
train moved now, the slow, brown, alder-shaded streams,
the tall hedgerows, the pollarded elms—all these things
made Solent realize how completely he had passed from
the sphere of his mother’s energetic ambitions into the
more relaxed world, rich and soft and vaporous as the
airs that hung over those mossy ditches, that had been
the native land of the man in the Ramsgard cemetery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mother’s grievances, posthumous and belated, but
full of an undying vigour, had never really made him
hate his father; and somehow the outburst that had
ended his scholastic career had released certain latent
instincts in him which now turned, with a fling of rebellious
satisfaction, to the wavering image of his sinister
begetter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Children, he knew, were often completely different
from both their progenitors, but Wolf had a shrewd
suspicion that there was very little in him that did not
revert, on one side or the other, to his two parents. He
was now thirty-five, a grim, harassed-looking, clean-shaven
man, with sunken eye-sockets; but he felt his
heart beating with keen excitement, as, after an absence
of a quarter of a century, he returned to his native pastures.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What would he find in that house of “Darnley Otter’s
mother?” Who was this Darnley Otter? What had he
to do with Mr. Urquhart? And what would Mr. Urquhart
reveal that evening as to the form his own services
were to take?</p>

<p class='pindent'>As the train drew up at Semley, he read the words,
“For Shaftesbury,” upon the notice-board; and very soon
the high grassy battlements of the great heathen fortress
loomed against the sky-line.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Staring at those turf-covered bastions, and drawing
into his lungs lovely breathings from damp moss and
cold primroses—breathings that seemed to float up and
down that valley on airy journeys of their own—he
found himself gathering his mental resources together
so as to face with a concentrated spirit whatever awaited
him in these pleasant places.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “Christ is not a man;
He never <span class='it'>was</span> a man,” he thought. “And He will be more
than a god when God is dead.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Three church-towers
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. three. Ramsgard .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. King’s Barton .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Blacksod
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it’s quaint to think that I’ve absolutely no idea
what I shall be feeling when I touch with my hand the
masonry of those three towers .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or what people I
shall know! I hope I shall find some girl who’ll let me
make love to her .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. tall and slim and white! I’d like
her to be <span class='it'>very</span> white .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. with a tiny little mole, like
Imogen’s, upon her left breast.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’d like to make
love to her out-of-doors .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. among elder-bushes .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
among elder-bushes and herb-Robert.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He pulled in his legs and clasped his hands over his
knees, leaning forward, frowning and intent. “I don’t
care whether I make money. I don’t care whether I get
fame. I don’t care whether I leave any work behind me
when I die. All I want is certain sensations!” And with
all the power of his wits he set himself to try and analyze
what these sensations were that he wanted beyond
everything.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The first thing he did was to attempt to analyze a
mental device he was in the habit of resorting to—a
device that supplied him with the secret substratum of
his whole life. This was a certain trick he had of doing
what he called “sinking into his soul.” This trick had
been a furtive custom with him from very early days. In
his childhood his mother had often rallied him about it
in her light-hearted way, and had applied to these
trances, or these fits of absent-mindedness, an amusing
but rather indecent nursery name. His father, on the
other hand, had encouraged him in these moods—taking
them very gravely, and treating him, when under their
spell, as if he were a sort of infant magician.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was, however, when staying in his grandmother’s
house at Weymouth, that the word had come to him
which he now always used in his own mind to describe
these obsessions. It was the word “mythology”; and he
used it entirely in a private sense of his own. He could
remember very well where he first came upon the word.
It was in a curious room, called “the ante-room,” which
was connected by folding-doors with his grandmother’s
drawing-room, and which was filled with the sort of
ornamental débris that middle-class people were in the
habit of acquiring in the early years of Queen Victoria.
The window of his grandmother’s room opened upon the
sea; and Wolf, carrying the word “mythology” into this
bow-window, allowed it to become his own secret name
for his own secret habit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This “sinking into his soul”—this sensation which he
called “mythology”—consisted of a certain summoning-up,
to the surface of his mind, of a subconscious magnetic
power which from those very early Weymouth
days, as he watched the glitter of sun and moon upon
the waters from that bow-window, had seemed prepared
to answer such a summons.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This secret practice was always accompanied by an
arrogant mental idea—the idea, namely, that he was taking
part in some occult cosmic struggle—some struggle
between what he liked to think of as “good” and what
he liked to think of as “evil” in those remote depths.</p>

<p class='pindent'>How it came about that the mere indulgence in a
sensation that was as thrilling as a secret vice should
have the power of rousing so bold an arrogance. Wolf
himself was never able to explain; for his “mythology,”
as he called it, had no outlet in any sort of action. It
was limited entirely to a secret sensation in his own
mind, such as he would have been hard put to it to explain
in intelligible words to any living person.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But such as it was, his profoundest personal pride—what
might be called his dominant <span class='it'>life-illusion</span>—depended
entirely upon it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not only had he no ambition for action; he had no
ambition for any sort of literary or intellectual achievement.
He hid, deep down in his being, a contempt that
was actually <span class='it'>malicious</span> in its pride for all the human
phenomena of worldly success. It was as if he had been
some changeling from a different planet, a planet where
the issues of life—the great dualistic struggles between
life and death—never emerged from the charmed circle
of the individual’s private consciousness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf himself, if pressed to describe it, would have
used some simple earthly metaphor. He would have said
that his magnetic impulses resembled the expanding of
great vegetable leaves over a still pool—leaves nourished
by hushed noons, by liquid transparent nights, by all
the movements of the elements—but making some inexplicable
difference, merely by their spontaneous expansion,
to the great hidden struggle always going on in
Nature between the good and the evil forces.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Outward things, such as that terrible face on the
Waterloo steps or that tethered cow he had seen at Basingstoke,
were to him like faintly limned images in a
mirror, the true reality of which lay all the while in his
mind—in these hushed expanding leaves—in this secret
vegetation—the roots of whose being hid themselves beneath
the dark waters of his consciousness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What he experienced now was a vague wonder as to
whether the events that awaited him—these new scenes—these
unknown people—would be able to do what no
outward events had yet done—break up this mirror of
half-reality and drop great stones of real reality—drop
them and lodge them—hard, brutal, material stones—down
there among those dark waters and that mental
foliage.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Perhaps I’ve never known reality as other human
beings know it,” he thought. “My life has been industrious,
monotonous, patient. I’ve carried my load like a
camel. And I’ve been able to do this because it hasn’t
been my real life at all! My ‘mythology’ has been my
real life.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The bluebottle fly moved slowly and cautiously across
Weymouth Bay, apparently seeking some invisible atom
of sustenance, seeking it now off Redcliff, now off Ringstead,
now off White Nore.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A sudden nervousness came upon him and he shivered
a little. “What if this new reality, when it does come,
smashes up my whole secret life? But perhaps it won’t
be like a rock or stone .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. perhaps it won’t be like
a tank or lorry or an aeroplane .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He clasped his bony fingers tightly together. “Some
girl who’ll let me make love to her .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ‘white as a
peeled willow-wand’ .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. make love to her in the middle
of a hazel wood .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. green moss .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. primroses
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. moschatel .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. whiteness.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” He unclasped his
fingers; and then clasped them again, this time with
the left hand above the right hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was nearly twelve o’clock when the train drew up
at Longborne Port, a village which he knew was the
last stop before he reached Ramsgard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rose from his seat and took down his things from
the rack, causing, as he did so, so much agitation to
his only travelling-companion, the bluebottle fly, that
it escaped with an indignant humming through the window
into the unfamiliar air-fields of Dorsetshire.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A young, lanky, bareheaded porter, with a countenance
of whimsical inanity, bawled out at the top of his
voice, as he rattled his milk-cans: “Longborne Port!
Longborne Port!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Nobody issued from the train. Nothing was put out of
the train except empty milk-cans. The young man’s
voice, harsh as a corncrake’s, seemed unable to disturb
the impenetrable security which hung, like yellow pollen
upon a drooping catkin, over those ancient orchards
and muddy lanes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And there suddenly broke in upon the traveller, as he
resumed his seat, with his coat and stick and bag spread
out before him, the thought of how those particular syllables—“Longborne
Port!”—mingling with the clatter
of milk-cans, would reproduce to some long-dead human
skull, roused to sudden consciousness after centuries of
non-existence, the very essence of the familiar life upon
earth!</p>

<p class='pindent'>What dark November twilights, what drowsy August
noons, what squirtings of white milk into shining pails,
would those homely syllables summon forth!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He lay back, breathing rather quickly, as the train
moved out of that small station. For the last time he
took from his pocket Mr. Urquhart’s letter. “Darnley
Otter!” he said to himself. “It’s odd to think how little
that name means now, and how much it may mean tomorrow!”
Why was it that, when the future was very
likely all there already, stretched out like the great Wessex
Fosse-way in front of him, he didn’t get some sort
of second-sight about it by merely reading those words
in Mr. Urquhart’s neat hand? What kind of man was
Darnley Otter? Was he a plain, middle-aged man like
himself or was he a beautiful youth? The idea of beautiful
youths made his mind once more revert to “peeled
willow-wands,” but he easily suppressed this thought in
the excitement of the moment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ay! There were the ruins of the great Elizabethan’s
castle. And <span class='it'>there</span> was the wide grassy expanse where the
town held its Annual Agricultural Show, and where the
Ramsgard schoolboys were wont in old days to run their
Steeplechase!</p>

<p class='pindent'>How it all came back! Twenty-five years it was, since
he left it, frightened and bewildered by his parents’ separation;
and how little it had changed!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He let his gaze wander over the high tops of the park
beech-trees till it lost itself in the blue sky.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Millions of miles of blue sky; and beyond that, millions
of miles of sky that could scarcely be called blue
or any other colour—pure unalloyed emptiness, stretching
outwards from where he sat—with his stick and coat
opposite him—to no conceivable boundary or end!
Didn’t that almost prove that the whole affair was a
matter of thought?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suppose he were now, at this moment, some Ramsgard
boy returning to school? Suppose he were Solent
Major instead of Wolf Solent? And suppose some genial
house-master, meeting him on the platform, were to say
to him: “Well, Solent, and what have <span class='it'>you</span> made of your
twenty-five years’ holiday?” What would he answer to
that?</p>

<p class='pindent'>As the train began to lessen its pace by the muddy
banks of the river Lunt, he hurriedly, and as if from
fear of that imaginary master, formulated his reply.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve learnt, Sir, to get my happiness out of sensation.
I’ve learnt, Sir, when to think and when not to
think. I’ve learnt .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But at this point his excitement at catching sight of
the familiar shape of the Lovelace Hotel, across the
Public Gardens, was so overwhelming, that the imaginary
catechism came to an end in mid-air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I shall send my things over in the bus,” he thought,
standing up and grasping his bag. “And then I shall go
and see if Selena Gault is still alive!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap02'>“CHRIST! I’VE HAD A HAPPY LIFE!”</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>His excitement grew rather than diminished as he
got out of the train.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He gave up his ticket to an elderly station-master,
whose air, at once fussily inquisitive and mildly deferential,
suggested the manner of a cathedral verger. He
watched his luggage being deposited on the Lovelace
Bus; and there came over him a vague recollection of
some incident of those early years, wherein his mother,
standing by that same shabby vehicle, or one exactly resembling
it, with a look of contemptuous derision on
her formidable face, said something hard and ironical
to him which lashed his self-love like a whip.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Opposite the station were the railed-in Public Gardens.
These also brought to his mind certain isolated
trivial occurrences of his childish days; and it struck
him, even in his excitement, just then as being strange
that what he remembered were things that had hurt his
feelings rather than things that had thrilled him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In place of following the bus round the west of the
Gardens, where the road led to the Hotel, and then on
past the police-station to the Abbey, he turned to the east
and made his way across a small river-bridge. Here,
again, the look of a certain old wall against the water,
and certain patches of arrow-head leaves within the
water, stirred his memory with a sudden unexpected agitation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was over this very bridge that twenty-five years ago
he had leaned with his father while William Solent
showed him the difference between loach and gudgeon,
and in a funny, rambling, querulous voice deplored
the number of castaway tins that lay in the muddy
stream.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf did not lean over the bridge this time. He
heard the Abbey clock striking one, and he hurried on
up Saint Aldhelm’s Street. Newly-budded plane-trees cast
curious little shadows, like deformed butterflies, upon the
yellowish paving-stones; and over the top of an uneven
wall at his side protruded occasional branch-ends of
pear-blossom.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He came at last to a green door in the wall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is it possible,” he wondered uneasily, “that Selena
Gault lives here still?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He allowed a baker’s cart to rattle negligently past
him while he made two separate hesitating movements of
his hand towards the handle of the green door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was queer that he should have had an instinct to
look sharply both up and down the street before he
brought himself to turn that handle. It was almost as
though he felt himself to be a hunted criminal, taking
refuge with Selena Gault! But the street was quite deserted
now, and with a quick movement he boldly opened
the gate and entered the garden.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A narrow stone path led up to the door of the house,
which resembled a doll’s house, brilliantly painted with
blues and greens. Blue and white hyacinths grew in
masses on either side of the path; and their scent, caught
and suspended in that enclosed space, had a fainting,
ecstatic voluptuousness which was at variance with the
prim neatness around them. A diminutive servant, very
old but very alert, with the nervous outward-staring eyes
of a yellow-hammer, opened the door to him, and without
demur ushered him into the drawing-room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He gave his name and waited. Almost immediately the
little servant came back and begged him to take a chair
and make himself comfortable. Miss Gault would see
him in a few minutes. Those few minutes lengthened
themselves into a quarter of an hour, and he had time to
meditate on all the possibilities of this strange encounter.
Miss Gault was the daughter of the late Headmaster of
Ramsgard; and Wolf had heard his mother for twenty-five
years utter airy sarcasms at her expense. It appeared
she had had some tender relation with his father;
had even attended William Solent’s death-bed in the
workhouse and seen him buried in the cemetery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf sat on Miss Gault’s sofa and set himself to wonder
what this rival of his mother’s would look like when
she entered the room. The servant had not quite closed
the door; and when fifteen minutes had elapsed, it
opened silently; and Wolf, rising quickly to greet his
hostess, found himself confronted by three cats, who
walked gravely and gingerly, one after another, into the
centre of the apartment. He made some awkward gesture
of welcome to these animals, who resembled one
another in shape, size, breed, and temperament—in everything
except colour, being respectively white, black, and
grey; but instead of responding to his advances they
each leapt into a separate chair, coiled themselves up,
and surveyed, with half-closed languid eyes, the door
through which they had entered. He felt as if he were in
the house of the Marquis of Carabas and that the three
cats were three Lord Chamberlains.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He sank back upon the sofa and stared morosely at
each cat in turn. He decided that he liked the black one
best and the grey one least. He decided that the white
one was its mistress’s favourite.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was occupied in this harmless manner when Selena
Gault herself came in. He rose and advanced towards
her with outstretched hand. But it was impossible for him
to eliminate from his expression the shock that her appearance
gave him; and it did not lessen his surprise
when she received his gesture with a formal bow and a
stiff rejection of his hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was a tall, bony woman, with a face so strikingly
ugly that it was impossible to avoid an immediate consciousness
of its ugliness; and it was borne in upon him,
as their conversation proceeded, that if only he <span class='it'>had</span> been
able to contemplate her countenance with unconcern, she
would have enjoyed one of the happiest moments of her
life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She made a sign for him to resume his seat; but as
she herself stood erect in front of the fire, which in
spite of the warmth of the day still burned on the hearth,
he preferred to remain on his feet. Like a flash he thought
to himself, “Can my father have actually embraced this
extraordinary person?” And then he thought to himself:
“The poor woman! Why, she can’t be able to meet
a single stranger anywhere without giving them a shock
like this.” But he had already begun speaking quietly
and naturally to her, even while he was thinking these
things.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I knew you would know who I was,” he said gently.
“I’ve just been invited down here. I’m going to do some
work—I can’t tell you quite what it is—out at King’s
Barton. I’m going to drive over there this afternoon; but
I thought I would come and see you first.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>While she listened to him, he noticed that she kept
pulling her white woollen shawl tighter and tighter
round her black silk dress. The effect of this was to give
her the appearance of someone caught unawares in some
sort of fancy costume—some costume that rendered her
ashamed and even ridiculous.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And so I just came straight in,” he went on, beginning
to feel a very odd sensation, a sensation as if he
were addressing someone who was listening all the time
in a kind of panic to a third person’s voice—“straight in
through your little green door and between those hyacinths.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She still made no observation and he noticed that one
marked quality of her ugliness was the dusky sallowness
of her cheeks combined with the ghastly pallor of
her upper lip, which projected from her face very much
as certain funguses project from the brown bark of a
dead tree.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve decided that your favourite cat is the white one,”
he brought out after an uncomfortable pause.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She did relax at this, and, moving to the chair occupied
by the grey cat, took up the animal in her arms and
sat down, holding it on her lap.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re wrong, wrong, wrong!” she whispered
hoarsely. “Isn’t he wrong, Matthew?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The cat took not the least notice of this remark or of
the fingers that caressed him; but it did impinge upon
the consciousness of Miss Gault’s visitor that this singular
woman’s hands were of a surprising beauty.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What are the names of the others?” Solent enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The black one is Mark,” replied the lady.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And the white one Luke?” he hazarded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She nodded; and then, quite suddenly, with an effort
as though a gust of wind had swept aside a mass
of dead leaves, uncovering the fresh verdure below, her
whole face relaxed into a smile of disarming sweetness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve never had a John,” she said. “And I never will.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf Solent was quick enough to take advantage of
this change of mood. He moved across to her, bent
down over her chair, and scratched Matthew’s head. “I
thought I’d like to go over and see where the grave is.”
His words were low-pitched but without any emotional
stress. His intonation could hardly have been different
if he had said, “I think I’ll go to the Abbey presently.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Selena Gault gave a deep sigh, but it seemed to Solent
like a sigh of relief rather than sadness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Quite right, quite proper,” he heard her murmur,
with her head held low and her hands occupied in
smoothing out the shawl beneath the body of the somnolent
cat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The best thing you could do,” she added.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Since she said nothing more and persisted in keeping
her head lowered—a position which accentuated the
enormity of her upper lip and the dark sallowness of her
face—Wolf began to feel as if he were an impertinent
intruder stroking the pet animal of some proud, secretive
being whose peculiarity it was to prefer beasts to
men.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He straightened himself and squared his shoulders
with a sigh. Then he moved across to the sofa and laid
his hand on his hat and stick, which he was rather surprised
to notice he had brought with him into the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I suppose,” he said, as he turned round with these
objects in the hand, “there’ll be someone out there at the
cemetery, some gardener or caretaker, who’ll know where
the grave is? I shouldn’t like to get out there and not be
able to find it. But I don’t want to let this day pass
without trying to find it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Selena Gault tossed the grey cat from her lap and
rose to her feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll come with you,” she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She uttered the words quite quietly, but he noticed
that she avoided looking him in the face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She stood for a time staring out of the window, motionless
and abstracted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If it would be a bother to you——” he began.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But she suddenly turned her distorted countenance full
upon him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sit down, boy,” she rapped out. “Do you think I’d let
you go there alone, if there were fifty gardeners?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She stared at him for a second after this with a look
that seemed to turn his bodily presence into the frame
of a doorway through which she gazed into the remote
past.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sit down, sit down,” she said more gently. “I’ll be
ready soon.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The door had not closed behind her for many minutes
when the elderly servant entered, carrying a silver
tray, upon which was a plate of Huntley and Palmer’s
oaten biscuits and a decanter of sherry. Wolf had poured
himself out as many as three glasses of this excellent
wine and had swallowed nearly all the biscuits before
Miss Gault returned. She found him stroking Mark, the
black cat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her appearance in hat and cloak was just as peculiar
as before, but more distinguished; and Wolf soon found
out, when presently they passed the front of the Abbey,
where several townspeople greeted her, that the power of
her personality was fully appreciated in Ramsgard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Their way to the cemetery took them straight past the
workhouse. This building was on the further side of
the road; but Solent was unable to restrain an impulse
to turn his head towards it. The edifice was rather less
gloomy than such erections usually are, owing to the
fact that some indulgent authority had permitted its
façade to be overgrown with Virginia creeper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found himself reducing his pace so that he might
familiarize himself with every aspect of that heavy, sombre
building behind iron gates. As he lingered he became
suddenly aware that his companion had slipped
her gloved hand upon his arm. This natural gesture,
instead of pleasing him or rousing his sympathy, made
him feel curiously irritable. He quickened his pace;
and her hand fell away so quickly that he might easily
have supposed that light pressure to have been a pure
accident.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They walked side by side now, with such swinging
steps that it was not long before they were beyond the
houses and out into what was almost open country. It
annoyed him that she remained so silent. Did she suppose
he had come to see his father’s grave in a vein of
sentimental commiseration?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s <span class='it'>that</span>?” he exclaimed, pointing to a ramshackle
group of sheds that seemed fenced off from the
road with some unnatural and sinister precaution.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Selena Gault’s reply made his touchiness seem captious
and misplaced.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Can’t you see what that is, boy? It’s the slaughter-house!
You’ve only to take the shadiest, quietest road
to find ’em in any town!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were soon skirting the edge of the neat oak
palings that ran along the leafy purlieus of Ramsgard
Cemetery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I let them bury him at the pauper’s end,” she remarked
gravely. “It’s nearer. It’s quieter. It’s hardly
ever disturbed. This is the way I generally go in.” With
a sly, quick glance up and down the road, a glance that
gave an emphasis to the whites of her eyes such as made
her companion think of a crafty dray-horse edging into
a field of clover, Miss Gault stooped down and propelled
herself under a rough obstruction that blocked a gap
in the oak palings.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Solent followed her, confused, a little surly, but no
longer hostile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She did not wait for him, but made her way with
long, rapid strides to the extreme corner of the enclosure.
Her swinging arms, her gaunt figure, her erratic gait,
set the man’s mind thinking once more of various non-human
animals.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He came up to her just as she reached her goal.
“William Solent,” he read, on the upright slab of sandstone;
and then, under the date of birth and death, the
words, “<span class='it'>Mors est mihi vita</span>.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had no difficulty in recognizing the particular
hyacinths that stood in an earthenware pot. “She must
have come here for twenty-five years!” he thought, with
a gasp of astonishment; and he gave her a hurried, furtive,
prying look from under his bushy eyebrows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She certainly did nothing on this occasion to cause
him any discomfort. She just muttered in quite a conventional
tone, “I never like to see plantains in the
grass”; and bending down, she proceeded to pull up certain
small weeds, making a little pile of them behind
the headstone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Swaying thus above the mound and scrabbling with
outstretched arms among the grass-blades, her figure in
the misty afternoon sunshine took on, as Wolf stood
there, a kind of portentous unreality. There was something
outlandish in the whole scene, something monstrous
and bizarre that destroyed all ordinary pathos.
Twenty-five years? If she had come here regularly for
all that time, how could there be any “plantains,” or
any clover, or any moss either, left upon his father’s
grave? He was so conscious of the personality of this
woman, so amazed at a tenacity of feeling that seemed to
pass all limits of what was due, that his own sensibility
became hard and rigid.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But though his emotions were cold, his imagination
worked freely. The few feet of Dorsetshire clay, the
half-inch of brittle West Country elm-wood, that separated
him from the up-turned skull of his begetter, were
like so much transparent glass. He looked down into
William Solent’s empty eye-sockets, and the empty eye-sockets
looked back at him. Steadily, patiently, indifferently
they looked back; and between the head without
a nose looking up and the head with so prominent a
nose looking down there passed a sardonic wordless
dialogue. “So be it,” the son said to himself. “I won’t
forget. Whether there are plantains or whether there
aren’t plantains, the universe shan’t fool me.” “Fool
me; fool me,” echoed the fleshless skull from below.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There!” sighed Selena Gault, rising to her natural
perpendicular position. “There! There won’t be any more
of <span class='it'>them</span> for a fortnight. Shall we go back now, boy?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they were once more in the road, Miss Gault
became a little more talkative.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re not like him, of course—not in any way. He
really was uncommonly handsome. Not that <span class='it'>that</span> had any
weight with <span class='it'>me</span>. But it had with some. It had with Mr.
Urquhart!” She paused and glanced almost mischievously
at her companion. “I’m sure I don’t know,” she
remarked, with a funny little laugh, “what Mr. Urquhart
will make of <span class='it'>you</span>!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The idea seems to be,” said Wolf gravely, while his
estimate of his new friend’s perspicacity became more
respectful, “that I should help him with some historical
researches. It appears he is writing a ‘History of Dorset.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“History of fiddlestick!” snapped the lady. And then
in a more amiable tone, “But he’s no idiot. He <span class='it'>has</span> read
a little. You’ll enjoy going through his library.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt himself experiencing a rather cowardly hope
that his companion would pass the slaughter-house this
time without comment. The hope was not fulfilled.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I suppose <span class='it'>you</span> eat them?” she asked in a hoarse
whisper; and Wolf, turning towards her a startled face,
was struck by an expression of actual <span class='it'>animal fear</span> upon
her extraordinary physiognomy. But she did not linger;
and it was not long before they were once more opposite
the workhouse.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you know what he said when he was dying?” she
began suddenly. “He didn’t say it particularly to me. I
just happened to be there. He said it to everyone in general.
He said, ‘Christ! I’ve enjoyed my life!’ He used the
word ‘Christ’ just in that way, as an exclamation. There
was a young clergyman there, straight down from Cambridge,
an athlete of some sort; and when your father
cried out ‘Christ!’ like that—and he was dead the next
second—I heard him mutter, ‘Good for you, Sir!’ as if
it had been a fine hit at a cricket-match.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf would have been entirely responsive now if Miss
Gault had touched his arm or even taken his arm, but
she walked forward without making any sign.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I expect your mother has abused me pretty thoroughly
to you since you were a child,” she said presently.
“Ann and I were never fond of each other. We were enemies
even before your father came. She cut me out, of
course, at every turn; but that didn’t bring her round!
She couldn’t forgive me for being the headmaster’s
daughter. You’ve no idea of the savage jealousies that
go on in a place like this. But wherever <span class='it'>we</span> were we
should have hated each other. Ann is flippant where I’m
serious, and I’m flippant where Ann is serious.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf tried in vain to imagine on what occasions Miss
Gault would display flippancy, but he knew well enough
what that word meant in regard to his mother. He was
seized at that moment with an irresistible temptation to
reveal to this woman the picture of her character with
which he had been regaled for the last twenty-five years.
It was a picture so extraordinarily different from the
reality, that it made him wonder if all women, whether
flippant or otherwise, were personal to the point of insanity
in their judgments of one another. What his
mother had told him was not even a caricature of Selena
Gault. It referred to another person altogether.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My mother has a lot of friends in town,” he began,
rather lamely. Miss Gault cut him short.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Of course she has! She’s a brave, high-spirited, ambitious
woman. Of course she has!” And then, in a low,
meditative voice that seemed to float wistfully over the
years, “She was very much in love with your father.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This last remark, coming at the moment when the
Abbey clock above their heads struck four, produced
considerable bewilderment in Wolf’s mind. The idea of
his estranged parents having been “in love” with each
other made him feel curiously in the cold, and strangely
alien to both of them. In some obscure way he felt as
if Selena Gault were practising an indecent treachery,
but a treachery so subtle that he couldn’t lay his finger
upon it!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s go in here for a minute!” he said. “And then I
must keep my appointment with Mr. Otter.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They entered the great nave of the Abbey-church and
sat down. The high, cool, vaulted roof, with its famous
fan-tracery, seemed to offer itself to his mind as if it
were some “branch-charmèd” vista of verdurous silence,
along which his spirit might drift and float at large, a
leaf among leaves!</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a faint greenish mist in that high roof, the
effect of some cavernous contrast with the mellow
warmth of the horizontal sun pouring through the coloured
windows below; and into that world of undulating
carving and greenish dimness, Wolf now permitted
his mind to wander, till he began to feel once again that
mysterious sensation which he called his “mythology.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt free of his mother, and yet tender and indulgent
towards her. He felt bound up in some strange
affiliation with that skeleton in the cemetery. He felt in
whimsical and easy harmony with the queer lady seated
by his side. The only thing that troubled him at all just
then was a faint doubt as to what effect this return to
the land of his birth would have upon his furtive, private,
hidden existence. Would he be crafty enough to
keep that secretive life-illusion out of the reach of danger?
Would his inner world of hushed Cimmerian ecstasies
remain uninvaded by these Otters and Urquharts?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt as though he were tightening his muscles for
a plunge into very treacherous waters. All manner of
unknown voices seemed calling to him out of this warm
Spring air; mocking voices, beguiling voices, insidious
voices—voices that threatened unguessed-at disturbances
to that underground life of his which was like a cherished
vice. It was not as though he heard the tones of these
voices so that he could have recognized them again. It
was as though a wavering crowd of featureless human
figures on the further side of some thick opaque latticework
were conferring together in conspiring awareness
of his immediate appearance among them!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The atmosphere was cooler when they came out of the
church. Its taste was the taste of an air that has been
blown over leagues and leagues of green stalks full of
chilly sap. It made Solent think of water-buttercups in
windy ponds, and the splash of moor-hens over dark
gurgling weirs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He parted from his companion by a grotesque little
statue under the lime-trees representing the debonair ancestor
of the Lovelaces whose name, though intimately
associated with Ramsgard, had slipped into something
legendary and remote. Selena Gault gave him her hand
with a stately inclination of her unlovely head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll come in and see me and my cats before long
and tell me your impressions of all those people?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I certainly will, Miss Gault,” he answered. “You’ve
been very good to me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tut, tut, boy! Good is not the word! When I come
to think of it, standing like that with your hat off, you
<span class='it'>have</span> a kind of look——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s under <span class='it'>your</span> influence, Miss Gault,” he hurriedly
said; and they took their separate ways.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was far less embarrassment for Wolf in his
encounter with Mr. Darnley Otter than he had expected.
They were the only men in that massive old-world
sitting-room, decorated with hunting-scenes and large
solemn prints of Conservative statesmen, and they found
it easy and natural to sit down opposite each other at
a round table and to enjoy an excellent tea. Wolf was
hungry. The bread-and-butter was fresh and plentiful.
The solidity of the teapot was matched by the thinness
of the cups; and the waiter, who seemed to know Mr.
Otter well, treated them both with a dignified obsequiousness
which had about it the mellow beauty of centuries
of feudal service.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was a clean-shaven man, this waiter, with an aristocratic
stoop and a face that resembled that of Lord
Shaftesbury, the great philanthropist; and Wolf felt an
obscure longing to sit opposite him in his own snug parlour—wherever
that was—and draw out of him the hidden
sources of that superb respectfulness—to be the
object of which, even for a brief hour’s tea-drinking, was
to be reconciled not only to oneself but also in some
curious way to the whole human race!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We haven’t seen Mr. Urquhart down here lately,” the
waiter was saying to Wolf’s new acquaintance. “His
health keeps up, I hope, Sir?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Perfectly,” responded Mr. Otter. “Perfectly, Stalbridge.
I hope you yourself are all right, Stalbridge?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had never seen a physical human movement
more expressive, more adjusted, more appropriate, than
the gesture with which the elderly servant balanced the
back of his hand against the edge of their table and
leaned forward to reply to this personal question. He noticed
this gesture all the more vividly because of a curiously
shaped white scar that crossed the back of the
man’s hand. But he now became aware of something
else about this waiter—something that surprised and
rather disturbed him. The fellow’s countenance did not
only remind him of Lord Shaftesbury. It reminded him
of that face by the Waterloo steps!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve nothing to complain of, Sir, thank you Sir, since
I settled that little legal trouble of mine. It’s the mind,
Sir, that keeps us up; and except for the malice and
mischief that comes to all, I’ve no grievance against the
Almighty.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The air of courteous magnanimity with which the old
waiter exonerated Providence made Wolf feel ashamed
of every peevishness he had ever indulged. But why did
he make him think of that Waterloo-steps face?</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Mr. Stalbridge had left them, to look after some
other guests, both the men, as they finished their tea
and lit their cigarettes, began to feel more comfortable
and reassured in their attitude to each other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley Otter was in every respect more of a classified
“gentleman” than Solent. He had a trim, pointed,
Van Dyck beard of a light-chestnut colour. His fingernails
were exquisitely clean. His necktie, of a dark-blue
shade, had evidently been very carefully chosen. His
grey tweed suit, neither too faded nor too new, fitted
his slender figure to a nicety. His features were sharply-cut
and very delicately moulded, his hands thin and
firm and nervous. When he smiled, his rather grave
countenance wrinkled itself into a thousand amiable
wrinkles; but he very rarely smiled, and for some reason
it was impossible for Solent to imagine him laughing.
One facial trick he had which Wolf found a little
disconcerting—since his own method was to stare so very
steadily from under his bushy eyebrows—a trick of
hanging his head and letting his eyelids droop over his
eyes as he talked. This habit was so constant with him
that it wasn’t until the dialogue with the waiter occurred
that Wolf realized what his eyes were like. They were
of a tint that Wolf had never seen before in any human
face. They were like the blue markings upon the sides of
freshly caught mackerel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But what struck Wolf most deeply was not the colour
of Mr. Otter’s eyes. It was their look. He had never in
the whole course of his life seen anything so harassed,
so anxious, as the expression in those eyes, when their
owner was unable any longer to avoid giving a direct
glance. Nor was it just simply that the man was of a
worrying turn of mind. The curious thing about the anxiety
in Mr. Otter’s eyes was that it was unnatural. There
was a sort of puzzled surprise in it, a sort of indignant
moral bewilderment, quite different from any constitutional
nervousness. His expression seemed to protest
against something that had been inflicted on him, something
unexpected, something that struck his natural acceptance
of life as both monstrous and inexplicable.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was when he spoke to the waiter that this unhappy
expression was caught most off-guard, and Wolf explained
this to himself on the theory that the waiter’s
abysmal tact unconsciously relieved his interlocutor from
the strain of habitual reticence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Their meal once over, it did not take them long to
get mounted, with all Wolf Solent’s luggage, in Mr.
Urquhart’s dog-cart. That afternoon’s drive from Ramsgard
to King’s Barton was a memorable event in Wolf’s
life. He had come already to feel a definite attraction toward
this scrupulously-dressed, punctilious gentleman
with the troubled mackerel-dark eyes; and as they sat
side by side in that dog-cart, jogging leisurely along
behind an ancient dapple-grey horse, he made up his
mind that if it was to be in Darnley Otter’s company
that his free hours were to pass, they would pass very
harmoniously indeed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The evening itself, through which they drove, following
a road parallel to and a little to the right of that
one which had ended with the cemetery, was beautiful
with an exceptional kind of beauty. It was one of those
Spring evenings which are neither golden from the direct
rays of the sinking sun, nor opalescent from their indirect
diffused reflection. A chilly wind had arisen, covering
the western sky, into which they were driving, with
a thick bank of clouds. The result of this complete extinction
of the sunset was that the world became a world
in which every green thing upon its surface received a
fivefold addition to its greenness. It was as if an enormous
green tidal wave, composed of a substance more
translucent than water, had flowed over the whole earth;
or rather as if some diaphanous essence of all the greenness
created by long days of rain had evaporated during
this one noon, only to fall down, with the approach of
twilight, in a cold, dark, emerald-coloured dew. The road
they thus followed, heading for that rain-heavy western
horizon, was a road that ran along the southern slope of
an arable upland—an upland that lay midway between
the pastoral Dorset valley which was terminated by the
hills and woods of High Stoy and the yet wider Somersetshire
valley that spread away into the marshes of
Sedgemoor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Solent learned from a few courteous but very abrupt
explanations interjected by his companions, that the
only other occupants of the house to which they were
proceeding were Darnley’s elder brother, Jason, and his
mother, Mrs. Otter. He also gathered that Darnley himself,
except on Saturdays and Sundays, worked as a classical
under-master in a small grammar-school in Blacksod.
By one means and another—Wolf was quick at
such surmises—he obtained an impression that this work
in Blacksod was anything but congenial to his reserved
companion. He also began to divine, though certainly
with no help from his well-bred friend, that these scholastic
activities of his were almost the sole financial support
of the family at Pond Cottage.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I do wish I could persuade you,” Solent began, when
they were still some two and a half miles from their
destination, “to give me some sort of notion of what
Mr. Urquhart really expects from me. I’ve never made
any historical researches in my life. I’ve only compiled
wretched summaries from books that everyone can get.
What will he want me to do? Go searching round in
parish-registers and so on?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The driver’s gaze, directed obstinately to the grey tail
of their slow-moving horse, remained unresponsive to
the querulousness of this appeal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I have a notion, Solent,” he remarked, “that you’ll
get light on a great many things as soon as you’ve seen
Mr. Urquhart.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf pulled down the corners of his mouth and lifted
his thick eyebrows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The devil!” he thought. “That’s just about what my
friend Miss Gault hinted.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He raised his voice and gave it a more serious tone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tell me, Otter, is Mr. Urquhart what you might call
eccentric—queer, in fact?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley did turn his bearded profile at this. “That
depends,” he said, “what you mean by ‘queer.’ I’ve always
found him very civil. My brother can’t bear the
sight of him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf made his favourite grimace again at this.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope your brother will approve of <span class='it'>me</span>,” he said.
“I confess I begin to be a bit frightened.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jason is a poet,” remarked Mr. Otter gravely, and his
tone had enough of a rebuke in it to rouse a flicker of
malice in his companion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope Mr. Urquhart isn’t a poet too,” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Otter took no notice of this retort except to fall
into a deeper silence than ever; and Wolf’s attention
reverted to what he could see of the famous Vale of
Blackmore. Every time the hedge grew low, as they
jogged along, every time a gate or a gap interrupted its
green undulating rampart, he caught a glimpse of that
great valley, gathering the twilight about it as a dying
god might gather to his heart the cold, wet ashes of his
last holocaust.</p>

<p class='pindent'>More and more did the feeling grow upon him that he
was entering into a new world where he must leave behind
the customs, the grooves, the habits of fifteen long
years of his life. “There’s one thing,” he thought to himself,
while a sudden chilliness struck his face as their
road drew nearer the course of the river, “that I’ll never
give up .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. not even for the sake of the slenderest
‘peeled willow-wand’ in Dorset.” As this thought crossed
his mind he actually tightened his two bony hands
tenaciously over his legs just above his knees, as if he
were fortifying himself against some unknown threat to
his treasured vice. And then in a kind of self-protective
reassembling of his memories, as if by the erection of a
great barrier of mental earthworks he could ward off any
attack upon his secret, he set himself to recall certain
notable landmarks among his experiences of the world
up to the hour of this exciting plunge into the unknown.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He recalled various agitating and shameful scenes
between his high-spirited mother and his drifting unscrupulous
father. He summoned up, as opposed to these,
his own delicious memories of long, irresponsible holidays,
lovely uninterrupted weeks of idleness, by the sea
at Weymouth, when he read so many thrilling books in
the sunlit bow-window at Brunswick Terrace. How
clearly he could see now the Jubilee clock on the Esplanade,
the pompous statue of George the Third, the
White Nore, the White Horse, the wave-washed outline
of Portland breakwater! How he could recall his childish
preference for the great shimmering expanse of wet
sand, out beyond the bathing-machines, over the hot,
dry sand under the sea-wall, where the donkeys stood
and Punch and Judy was played!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I am within twenty miles of Weymouth here,” he
thought. “<span class='it'>That’s</span> where my real life began .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>that’s</span> the
place I love .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in spite of its lack of hedges and
trees!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he recalled his tedious uninspired youth in London,
the hateful day-school, the hateful overcrowded
college, the interminable routine of his ten years of
teaching. “A double life! A double life!” he muttered
under his breath, staring at the grey rump of Mr. Urquhart’s
nag, as it swayed before him, and moving his own
body a little forward, as he tightened his grip still more
fiercely upon his own bony thighs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Was he going to be plunged now into another world
of commonplace tedium, full of the same flat, conventional
ambitions, the same sickening clevernesses? It
couldn’t be so! It couldn’t .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it couldn’t .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. with
this enchanted springtime stirring in all these leaves and
grasses.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What a country this was!</p>

<p class='pindent'>To his right, as they drove along, the ground sloped
upwards—cornfield after cornfield of young green shoots—to
the great main ridge between Dorset and Somerset,
along which—only a mile or so away, his companion
told him—lay the main highway, famous in West Country
history, between Ramsgard and Blacksod, and also
between—so Mr. Otter assured him—Salisbury and
Exeter!</p>

<p class='pindent'>To his left the Vale of Blackmore beckoned to him
out of its meadows—meadows that were full of faint
grassy odours which carried a vague taste of river-mud
in their savour because of the nearness of the banks of
the Lunt. From Shaftesbury, on the north, to the isolated
eminence of Melbury Bub, to the south, that valley
stretched away, whispering, so it seemed, some inexplicable
prophetic greeting to its returned native-born.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he listened to the noise of the horse’s hooves
steadily clicking, clicking, clicking, with every now and
then a bluish spark rising in the dusk of the road, as iron
struck against flint; as he watched the horizon in front
of him grow each moment more fluid, more wavering;
as he saw detached fragments of the earth’s surface—hill-curves,
copses, far-away fields and hedges—blend
with fragments of cloud and fragments of cloudless
space, it came over him with a mounting confidence that
this wonderful country must surely deepen, intensify, enrich
his furtive inner life, rather than threaten or destroy
it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Thus clutching his legs as if to assure himself of his
own identity, thus leaning eagerly forward by his companion’s
side, his eyebrows contracted into a fixed frown
and his nostrils twitching, Wolf felt the familiar mystic
sensation surging up even now from its hidden retreat.
Up, up it rose, like some great moonlight-coloured fish
from fathomless watery depths, like some wide-winged
marsh-bird from dark untraversed pools! The airs of this
new world that met its rising were full of the coolness of
mosses, full of the faint unsheathing of fern-fronds.
Whatever this mysterious emotion was, it leaped forward
now towards the new element as if conscious that it
carried with it a power as formidable, as incalculable, as
anything that it could encounter there.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap03'>A DORSET CHRONICLE</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>“So this is to be your room,” said Mrs. Otter. “I
knew you’d want to see it at once; as you have to dress,
of course, for dining at the House? It’s not large, but I
think it’s rather comfortable. My son Jason said only
just now that he felt quite envious of it. His own room
is just opposite, looking on the back garden, as yours
does on the front. I think we might show him Jason’s
room, don’t you, Darnley? It’s so very characteristic!
At least we try to keep it so, don’t we, Darnley? Darnley
and I do it ourselves, when he’s out.” Her voice,
as the two men stood in the doorway staring at Solent’s
pieces of shabby luggage, which they had just
carried in, sank into a confidential whisper. “He’s out
now,” she added. They both moved aside as she proceeded
to make her way across the small passage.
“There!” she exclaimed, opening a door; and Wolf
peered into complete and rather stuffy darkness. “There!
Perhaps you have a match, Darnley?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley obediently struck a match and proceeded to
set alight two ornate candles that stood on a chest of
drawers. The whole look of the chamber thus revealed,
was detestable to the visitor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Above the bed hung an enormous Arundel print of
a richly gilded picture by Benozzo Gozzoli; and above
the fireplace, where a few red coals still smouldered,
was a morbidly sanctimonious Holy Family by Filipino
Lippi.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d better open the window a little, mother, hadn’t
I?” said Darnley, moving across the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No—no, dear!” cried the lady hurriedly. “He feels
the draught so terribly when he’s indoors. It’s only cigarette-smoke—and
a little incense,” she added, turning
to Wolf. “He finds incense refreshing. We order it from
the Stores. Darnley and I don’t care for it. So a little
lasts a long time.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He must have gone to Blacksod again,” remarked
the son grimly, glancing at his watch and looking very
significantly at his mother.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If he has, I’m sure I hope they’ll be nicer to him than
they were last time,” murmured the lady.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“At the Three Peewits?” retorted her son drily. “Too
nice, I daresay! I wish he’d stick to Farmer’s Rest.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We are referring to the inns in this neighbourhood
where my son meets his friends,” remarked the mother;
and Wolf, contemplating the thin, peaked face, the
smooth, high forehead, the neatly brushed pale hair,
the nun-like dress of the little woman, felt ashamed of
the first rush of inconsiderate contempt that her manner
of speech had provoked in him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There’s something funny about all this,” he thought
to himself. “I’ll be interested to see this confounded
incense-burner.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Left to himself to unpack his things, he looked round
with anxious concern at the room that was to be his
base of operations, his secret fox’s hole, for so prolonged
a time. There was a Leighton over the mantelpiece,
and a huge Alma-Tadema between the two windows;
and he divined at once that the spare-bedroom
was used as a depository by this household for mid-Victorian
works of art.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He leaned out of one of the windows. A sharp scent
of jonquils was wafted up from some flower-bed below;
but the night was so dark he could see nothing except
a row of what looked like poplar-trees and a clump of
thick bushes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He quickly unpacked his clothes and put them away
in easily-opening, agreeably-papered drawers. There was
a vase of rust-tinted polyanthuses on the dressing-table;
and he thought to himself, “The poet’s mother knows
how to manage things!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He decided at first to confine himself to a dinner-jacket;
but realizing that he had only one pair of black
trousers, and that these went best with the tail-coat, he
changed his mind and put on full evening-dress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he finally tied his white tie into a bow at the small
mahogany-framed looking-glass, he could not help thinking
of the many unknown events that would occupy his
thoughts as he stood just there in future days—events
that were only now so many airy images, floating, drifting,
upon the sea of the unborn.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How will Mr. Urquhart receive me?” his thoughts
ran on. “This brother of Otter’s doesn’t like him; but
that’s nothing.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’ll deal with these awful pictures
later!” And he carefully extinguished his candles and
stepped out on the landing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little dining-room of Pond Cottage faced the
drawing-room at the foot of the stairs; and when he
stood in the hall, hesitating over which room to enter,
he was surprised to find himself beckoned to, eagerly
and surreptitiously, by a bent old woman in a blue
apron, laying the dinner. He crossed the threshold in
answer to this appeal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know’d yer,” the crone whispered. “I know’d ’twas
none o’ they, soon as I did hear yer feet. Looksy here,
Mister! Master Darnley’ll want to go up to Squire’s with
’ee. Don’t ’ee let ’un go! That’s what I’ve got to say
to ’ee. Don’t ’ee let ’un go! ’Tis no walk up to House.
’Tis straight along Pond Lane and down Lenty, and
there ’a be! Just ’ee go off now, quiet-like, afore they
be comed downstairs. I’ll certify to Missus that I telled
’ee the way to House. Don’t ’ee stand staring at a person
toad-struck and pondering! Off with ’ee now! Be an
angel of a sweet young gent! There! Don’t ’ee wait a
minute. They’ll be down, afore ’ee can holler yer own
name. Out wi’ ’ee, and God bless ’ee. Straight to the
end of Pond, and then down Lenty!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was the nature of Wolf Solent, when other things
were equal, to be easy, flexible, obliging. So without
asking any questions he silently and expeditiously
obeyed the old servant. He snatched up his hat and his
overcoat, and vanished into the darkness of the night.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I suppose this is Pond Lane,” he said to himself, as
he made his way in the direction pointed out by the old
woman. “But if it isn’t, I can’t help it. They’re all on
the jump about that chap’s coming home. She wanted
to keep Otter in the house to deal with the beggar.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Fortune favoured him more than he might have expected.
Just where Pond Lane turned into Lenty, he met
a group of children, and under their direction he had
no difficulty in finding the drive-entrance to King’s Barton
Manor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was not a long drive and it did not lead to a big
house. Built in the reign of James the First, Barton
Manor had always remained a small and unimportant
dwelling. Its chief glory was its large and rambling garden—a
garden that needed more hands to keep it in order
than the present owner was able to afford.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And, standing on the top of the weather-stained, lichen-spotted
stone steps, after he had rung the bell, Wolf
Solent had time, before anyone answered his ring, to
imbibe something of the beauty of this new surrounding.
The sky had cleared a little, and from a few open
spaces, crowded with small faint stars, a pallid luminosity
revealed the outlines of several wide, velvety
lawns, intersected by box-hedges, themselves divided by
stone-flagged paths. Wolf could see at one end of these
lawns a long, high yew-hedge, looking in that uncertain
light so mysterious and ill-omened that it was easy to
imagine that on the further side of it all manner of
phantasmal figures moved, ready to vanish at cockcrow!</p>

<p class='pindent'>For one moment he had a queer sensation that that
wretched human face he had seen on the Waterloo steps
hung there—there also, between the branches of a tall
obscure tree that grew at the end of that yew-hedge. But
even as he looked, the face faded; and instead of it, so
wrought-upon were his nerves at that moment, there appeared
to him the worried, anxious, mackerel-coloured
eyes of Darnley Otter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was disturbed in these fancies by the opening of
the carved Jacobean door. The man-servant who admitted
him was, to his surprise, dressed in rough working-clothes.
He was an extremely powerful man, and had a
swarthy, gipsy-like complexion and coal-black hair.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Excuse me, Sir,” he said with a melancholy smile,
as he took the visitor’s coat and laid it on a great oak
chest that stood in the hall. “Excuse me, Mr. Solent, but
I’ve been working till a few minutes ago in the stable.
He never likes me to apologize to gentlemen who come;
but that’s the way I am; and I hope you’ll excuse me,
Sir.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Even at the very moment he was muttering an appropriate
reply to this somewhat unusual greeting, and allowing
his thoughts, below the surface of his words,
to reflect how oddly the servants in King’s Barton behaved,
Wolf became aware of the approach of an imposing
personage coming down the long hallway towards
them. This figure, limping very much and leaning upon
a stick, was in evening-dress; and as he approached he
muttered, over and over again, in a low, soft, satiny
voice: “What’s this I hear, eh? What’s this I hear, eh?
What’s this I hear, eh?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tall coachman, or gardener, or whatever he was,
did not wait for his master’s arrival. With one quick
glance at Solent and a final “Excuse me, Sir!” he vanished
through a side-door, leaving Wolf to face his
host without any official announcement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Solent? Very good. Mr. Wolf Solent? Very, very
good. You received my letter and you came at once?
Excellent. Very, very good.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Uttering these words in the same low voice that made
Wolf think of the unrolling of some great, rich bundle
of Chinese silk, he offered his left hand to his visitor
and kept his right still leaning upon the handle of the
stick that supported him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The impression Wolf got from Mr. Urquhart’s face
was extremely complicated. Heavy eyelids, and pendulous,
baggy foldings below the eyes, made one aspect of
it. Greenish-blackness in the eyes themselves, and something
profoundly suspicious in their intense questioning
gaze, made another. An air of agitated restlessness,
amounting to something that might have been described
as a hunted look, made yet a third. The features of
the face, taken in their general outlines, were massive
and refined. It was in the expression that flitted across
them that Wolf detected something that puzzled and
perturbed him. One thing was certain. Both Mr. Urquhart’s
head and Mr. Urquhart’s stomach were unnaturally
large—far too large for his feeble legs. His
hair, which was almost as black as that of his man-servant,
caused Wolf to wonder whether or not he wore
a wig.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Dropping his visitor’s hand, he suddenly stood stock-still,
in the attitude of one who listens. Wolf had no
idea whether he was arrested by sounds in the garden
outside or sounds in the kitchen inside. He himself heard
nothing but the ticking of the hall-clock.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Presently the squire spoke again. “They didn’t come
with you then? They didn’t bring you to the door then?”
He spoke with what Wolf fancied was a tone of nervous
relief.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I found my way very easily,” was all the visitor could
reply.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s that? You came alone? They let you come
alone?” The man gave him a quick, suspicious glance,
and limped a step or two towards the front-door. Wolf
received an impression that he wasn’t believed, and that
Mr. Urquhart thought that, if the door were opened and
he called loud enough, someone would respond at once
out of the darkness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Didn’t Darnley come <span class='it'>any</span> of the way with you?” This
was said with such a querulous, suspicious accent that
Wolf looked him straight in the face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They didn’t even know I had left the house,” he
remarked sternly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart glanced at the door through which the
servant had vanished.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I told him to lay three places,” he remarked. “I made
sure they wouldn’t let you come alone.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf, at this, lifted one of his thick eyebrows; and a
flicker of a smile crossed his mouth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Would you like me to run over and fetch him?” he
said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s that, eh? Fetch him? Did you say fetch him?
Of course not! Come, come. Let’s go in. Monk will have
everything ready by now. Come along. This is the way.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He led his visitor down the hall and into a small oak-panelled
room. The table <span class='it'>was</span> laid for three; and no
sooner were they seated, than Roger Monk, re-garbed as
if by magic in a plain dark suit, and accompanied by a
young maid in cap and apron, brought in two steaming
soup-plates. The dinner that followed was an exceptionally
good one, and so also was the wine. Both host
and guest drank quite freely; so that by the time the
servants left them to their own devices, there had emerged
not only a fairly complete understanding as to the character
of the work which Wolf was to undertake in that
remarkable establishment, but also a certain <span class='it'>rapport</span> between
their personalities.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Staring contentedly at a large monumental landscape
by Gainsborough, where what might have been called
the spiritual idea of a Country Road lost itself between
avenues of park-like trees and vistas of mysterious
terrace-walks, Wolf began to experience, as he sipped his
port wine and listened to his host’s mellow discourse, a
more delicious sense of actual physical well-being than
he had known for many a long year.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He soon discovered that he was to labour at his particular
share of their grandiose enterprise in a window-seat
of the big library of the house, while Mr. Urquhart
pursued independent researches in a room he called
“the study.” This was excellent news to the new secretary.
Very vividly he conjured up an image of that window-seat,
ensconced behind mullion-panes of armorial glass,
and opening upon an umbrageous vista resembling that
picture by Gainsborough!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Our history will be an entirely new <span class='it'>genre</span>,” Mr. Urquhart
was saying. “What I want to do is to isolate the
particular portion of the earth’s surface called ‘Dorset’;
as if it were possible to decipher there a palimpsest of
successive strata, one inscribed below another, of human
impression. Such impressions are forever being made and
forever being obliterated in the ebb and flow of events;
and the chronicle of them should be continuous, not
episodic.” He paused in his discourse to light a cigarette;
which, when it was lit, he waved to and fro, forming
curves and squares and patterns. His hand holding
the cigarette was white and plump, like the hand of a
priest; and, as he wrote on the air, a trail of filmy
smoke followed the movements of his arm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Of course, a genuine continuity,” he went on, “would
occupy several lifetimes in the telling of it. What’s to be
done then, eh? D’ye see the problem? Eh? What’s to be
done?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Solent indicated as well as he could by discreet facial
signs that he did see the problem, but left its solution
to the profound intelligence in front of him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart proceeded. “We must select, my friend.
We must select. All history lies in selection. We can’t
put in everything. We must put in only what’s got pith
and sap and salt. Things like adulteries, murders, and
fornications.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Are we to have any method of selection?” Wolf enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart chuckled. “Do you know what I’ve
thought?” he said. “I’ve thought that I’d like to get the
sort of perspective on human occurrences that the bedposts
in brothels must come to possess—and the counters
of bar-rooms—and the butlers’ pantries in old houses—and
the muddy ditches in long-frequented lovers’ lanes.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s in fact a sort of Rabelaisian chronicle you wish
to write?” threw in Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart smiled and leant back in his chair. He
drained his wine-cup to the dregs, and with half-shut
malignant eyes, full of a strange inward unction, he
squinnied at his interlocutor. The lines of his face, as he
sat there contemplating his imaginary History, took to
themselves the emphatic dignity of a picture by Holbein.
The parchment-like skin stretched itself tightly and
firmly round the bony structure of the cheeks, as though
it had been vellum over a mysterious folio. A veil of
almost sacerdotal cunning hovered, like a drooping gonfalon,
over the man’s heavy eyelids and the loose
wrinkles that gathered beneath his eyes. What still puzzled
Wolf more than anything else was the youthful
glossiness of his host’s hair, which contrasted very oddly
not only with the extreme pallor of his flesh, but also
with the deeply indented contours of his Holbein-like
countenance. Mr. Urquhart’s coiffure seemed, in fact,
an obtrusive and unnatural ornament designed to set
off quite a different type of face from the one it actually
surmounted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is it or isn’t it a wig?” Wolf caught himself wondering
again. But each furtive glance he took at the
raven-black cranium opposite him made such a supposition
less and less credible; for by the flicker of the
candles he seemed to detect the presence of actual individual
hairs, coarsely and strongly growing, on either
side of the “parting” in the centre of that massive skull.
While he was considering this phenomenon, he became
conscious that Mr. Urquhart had left the matter of Dorset
Chronicles and was speaking of religion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I was brought up an Anglican and I shall die an
Anglican,” he was saying. “That doesn’t in the least
mean that I believe in the Christian religion.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a pause at this point, while the squire refilled
his own glass and that of his visitor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I like the altar,” the man continued. “The altar, Mr.
Solent, is the one absolutely satisfactory object of worship
left in our degenerate days.” There came into Mr.
Urquhart’s face, as he uttered these words, an expression
that struck Wolf as nothing less than Satanic.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It—does—not—matter—to you then, Sir,” threw out
Wolf cautiously, “what the altar represents?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart smiled. “Eh?” he muttered. “Represents—did
you say?” And then in a vague, dreamy, detached
manner he repeated the word “represents” several
times, as if he were mentally examining it, as a
connoisseur might examine some small object; but his
voice, as he did this, grew fainter and fainter, and presently
died away altogether.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The new secretary bowed discreetly over his plate of
almonds and raisins. He suspected that if it had not been
for the excellence of the wine, the great swaying pontifical
head in front of him would have been more reserved
in its unusual credo.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is the church in King’s Barton ritualistic enough for
your taste, Sir?” he enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then straight out of the air there came into his
mind the image of Mr. John Urquhart, stark naked, with
a protuberant belly like Punch or Napoleon, kneeling
in the dead of night, while a storm of rain lashed the
windows, before the altar of a small, dark, unfrequented
edifice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Eh? What’s that?” grumbled his entertainer. “The
church here? Oh, Tilly-Valley’s all right. Tilly-Valley’s
as docile as a ewe-lamb.” He leaned forward with a sardonic
leer, lowering his head between the candles as if
he possessed a pair of sacred horns. “Tilly-Valley’s
afraid of me; just simply afraid.” His voice sank into a
whisper. “I make him say Mass every morning. D’ye
hear? I make him say Mass whether there’s anyone there
or not.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tone in which Mr. Urquhart uttered these words
roused a definite hostility in Wolf’s nerves. There came
over him a feeling as if he had been permitted, on an
airless night, to catch a glimpse of monstrous human
lineaments behind the heavy rumble of a particular clap
of thunder. There was something abominably menacing
in this great wrinkled white face, with its glossy, carefully
parted hair, its pendulous eyelids, its baggy eye-folds,
butting at him between the candle-flames.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It presented itself to his mind as a clear issue, that
he had now really come across a person who, in that
mysterious mythopœic world in which his own imagination
insisted on moving, was a serious antagonist—an antagonist
who embodied a depth of actual evil such as was
a completely new experience in his life. This idea, as it
slowly dawned upon his wine-befogged brain, was at
once an agitating threat and an exciting challenge. He
deliberately stiffened the muscles of his body to meet this
menace. He straightened his shoulders and glanced carelessly
round the room. He composed his countenance
into an expression of cautious reserve. He stretched out
his legs. He threw one of his arms over the back of his
chair. He clenched together the fingers of his other hand,
as it lay on his knee beneath the table. He knew well
enough that what Mr. Urquhart saw in these manifestations
was an access of casual <span class='it'>bonhomie</span> in his new secretary,
a <span class='it'>bonhomie</span> amounting to something almost like
youthful bravado. He knew that what he did not see was
a furtive gathering together of the forces of an alien
soul, a soul composed of metaphysical chemicals directly
antipodal to those out of which his own was compounded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What Wolf felt in his own mind just then summed
itself up in vague half-articulated words uttered in that
margin of his consciousness where the rational fades
away into the irrational. “This Dorsetshire adventure is
going to be serious,” he said to himself. And then he became
suddenly aware that though quite ignorant of all
that was occurring in the mind and nerves of his visitor,
the squire of King’s Barton had grown alive to the fact
that his remarks were not meeting with the same magnetic
response that they had met with at first. After a
minute or two of silence, Mr. Urquhart rose and limped
towards the door of the dining-room. He opened the door
for Wolf and they both went out into the hall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think,” he said, as they stood at the foot of the
stately Jacobean staircase, “I think I will not show you
the library tonight. You have had a tiring day, and if
I take you upstairs there’s no knowing when we shall
separate! By Jove”—and he glanced at the hall-clock—“it’s
past ten already! Better say good-night before we
start talking again, eh? You’ve got a walk before you,
too. Better say good-night before we get too interested
in each other, eh? What? Where’d that idiot put your
things? Oh, good! Very good. Well, come again by ten
o’clock tomorrow morning and we’ll settle everything.
I am very relieved to find how much we’ve got in common.
My History will not be betrayed by <span class='it'>your</span> assistance
as it was by my last helper.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf walked to the place where his coat had been
laid down by the man-servant, and after he had put it
on, and picked up his hat and stick, he turned to his host,
who kept uttering meaningless monosyllables in a silky,
propitiatory whisper, as if he were ushering out a madman
or a policeman; and asked him point-blank who this
ill-advised predecessor of his was, turning as he did so
the handle of the front-door. The question seemed to
disturb Mr. Urquhart’s mental equanimity, as much as
the chilly March wind that blew in with a gust when the
door was opened, disturbed his physical balance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Eh? What? What’s that? Didn’t Darnley tell you?
The boy ruined my History at the start. I had to tear up
every scrap. He dropped it and went—all in a minute.
Eh? What? Didn’t Darnley tell you? He left it in chaos.
He played hop-scotch with it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Struggling with the heavy door and the gusty wind,
Solent muttered a propitiatory reply.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Very annoying—I hope, indeed, I shall do better,
Sir! You had to get rid of him, then?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The wind whistled past him as he spoke, so that his
host’s final word was scarcely audible. In fact, the last
thing he saw of Mr. Urquhart was a feeble attempt the
man seemed to be making to cover his rotund stomach
with the flaps of his dress-suit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When at last the great door had really closed between
them and he was striding down the stone steps, he found
his mind full of the impression which that inarticulate
final word had made upon him; and before he reached
the end of the drive and passed through the iron gates
into Lenty Lane, he had come to the startling conclusion
that his predecessor in the study of Dorset Chronicles
had died, as they say in that county, “in the het of his
job.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good Lord!” he thought, as he turned into Pond
Lane. “If all he feels for his assistants when they die
at their post is anger like that, he must be a queer chap
to deal with. Or did he mean something quite different?
Dead? Dead? But that wasn’t the word he used. What
<span class='it'>was</span> the word he used?” And he continued worrying
over the wind-blown sarcasm he had caught in the doorway,
without coming to any solution of the riddle. “If
it wasn’t that he meant the fellow was dead, what <span class='it'>did</span>
he mean?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind was so full of this problem that he arrived
at the gate into the small garden of Pond Cottage before
he was aware of it. There was a faint reddish light
in the window of what he knew was his own bedroom.
“She’s given me a fire!” he thought to himself; and he
looked forward with keen anticipation to his first night
in Dorset after twenty-five years.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Opening the door quietly, he lit a match as soon as
he was inside, and turned the key in the lock. He then
took the precaution of taking off his shoes; and lightly
and stealthily he slipped upstairs and entered his room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had no sooner done so than a figure rose up from
a chair by the fire and stumbled towards him. It was
a middle-aged man, in a long, white, old-fashioned nightshirt,
with a woollen shawl wrapped about his shoulders.
There was no light but the firelight in the room; and the
man’s countenance was a mere blur above the folded
shawl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Was writing poetry .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. let my fire out .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. came
before expected .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. humbly apologize .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hope you’ll
sleep well .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” Without further explanation the man
pushed past him and went out, leaving these broken
sentences humming in the air like the murmurs of some
thick, muffled, mechanical instrument. Once more Wolf
found himself alone with the Landseer and the Alma-Tadema
pictures.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This is too much!” he muttered furiously. “If I can’t
have my room to myself I’ll go somewhere else,” he
thought. “Does this incense-burner suppose that everyone
in the world must humour his whimsies?” He opened
both windows wide and lit the candles on his dressing-table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Apparently Jason Otter had retired quietly to his bedroom,
for the house was now as silent as the darkness
outside it. He began slowly undressing. For a while his
irritation was prolonged by the way the wind kept making
the candles flare; but gradually, in the freshness of
the cool garden-smells, his accustomed equanimity returned.
After all, there would be plenty of time to adjust
all these things! He must propitiate these people to the
limit at present, and feel his way. It would be silly
to show touchiness and cantankerousness at the very start.</p>

<p class='pindent'>By the time he had blown out the flickering candles
and was safe in bed, his habitual mood had quite reasserted
itself. He went over in his mind his conversation
with Mr. Urquhart, and wondered how far his
imagination had led him on to exaggerate the sinister
element in the man. He wished intensely that he had
caught the drift of that final word about his predecessor.
Was he dead? Or was it only that he had been ignominiously
dismissed?</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he grew sleepy, all manner of trivial occurrences
and objects of this adventurous day began rising up before
him, emphasizing themselves, out of all proportion
to the rest, in a strange half-feverish panorama. The
long, enchanted road revealed in that Gainsborough picture
hovered before him and beckoned him to follow it.
The abrupt apologies of Roger Monk melted into the
furtive exhortations of the old woman in the blue apron.
Framed in the darkness that closed in upon him, the
coarse black hairs, that had refused to be reduced to a
wig, metamorphosed themselves into similar hairs, growing,
as he knew they <span class='it'>could</span> grow, upon a long-dead human
skull! The jogging grey haunches of the mare that
had brought him from Ramsgard confused themselves
with the grey paws of the cat upon Selena Gault’s knees.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Very vividly, more vividly than anything else, he saw
the waiter at the Lovelace, as he leaned heavily upon
their tea-table. He remembered now both the queer whitish
scar on the back of that hand and the resemblance to
the Waterloo-steps face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then, all suddenly, it seemed that he could think
of nothing else but the completely unknown personality—apparently
that of the clergyman of the place—referred
to so contemptuously by Mr. Urquhart as “Tilly-Valley.”
While the syllables “Tilly-Valley” repeated
themselves in his brain, the person concealed behind
that odd appellation ceased to be a man. He became some
queer-shaped floating object that could not be put into
words, and yet was of the utmost importance. What
was of importance was that an obstinate bend in that
floating object should be straightened out. Something was
preventing it from being straightened out, something that
emanated from a black wig and a woollen shawl, and was
extremely thick and heavy, and had a taste like port
wine!</p>

<p class='pindent'>But there was another thing, far down, far off, covered
up, as if by masses of dead leaves, a thing that was
stirring, gathering, rising, a thing that, in a minute more,
would give him illimitable reassurance and strength.
When this thing rose to the surface, the bent twig would
be straightened out—and all would be well! This “all
being well” implied that that calm, placid cow which
was eating plantain-leaves under Basingstoke church-tower,
should stop eating and lie down. The cow lying
down would be a beautiful green mound covered with
plantains—plantains that grew larger and larger, till
they became enormous succulent leaves as big as elephants’
ears; but the cow couldn’t quite lie down. Something
thick and heavy and sticky, like port wine, impeded
its movements.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Everything in the world was material now. Thoughts
were material. Feelings were material. It was a world
of material objects, of which his mind was one. His
mind was a little bluish-coloured thing, soft, fluffy, like
blue cotton-wool; and what was rising out of the dead
leaves was blue too, but the sticky impeding thing was
brown, and the bent twig was brown.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was as if in that slow sinking into sleep his soul
had to pass all the long, previous, evolutionary stages
of planetary life, and be conscious with the consciousness
of vegetable things and mineral things. This is what
made every material substance of such supernal importance
to him—of an importance which perhaps material
substances really <span class='it'>did</span> possess, if all were known.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap04'>GERDA</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>The first sensation to which Wolf awoke in a
morning of rainy wind and drifting clouds, was a sensation
of discomfort. As his mind began concentrating
on this discomfort, he realized it proceeded from those
two heavily-framed pictures which gave to his chamber
a sort of reading-room or club-room aspect. Harmless
enough in themselves had they awaited him in the parlour
of an hotel, they seemed no less than an outrage
upon his senses when associated with this simple and
quiet bedroom. He resolved to issue an ultimatum at
once. He hadn’t come to Dorsetshire to be oppressed by
the ponderous labours of Royal Academicians. And he
would also make it clear that his bedroom was to be his
sanctuary. No night-shirted intruder should run in and
out at his pleasure!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He leapt from the bed and proceeded to turn to the
wall both of the mid-Victorian masterpieces. That done,
he lay down again and gave himself up to the rainy air,
full of the smell of young leaves and wet garden-mould.
Lying stretched out upon his back, he set himself with
a deliberate effort to gather up his recent impressions
and relate them as well as he could to the mood of yesterday’s
drive. With clear awareness of most of the
things that had happened to him since he left his mother
at the door of their little flat in Hammersmith, he was
oddly conscious that all his deepest instincts were still
passive, expectant, waiting. He was like a man who recovers
from the shock of a shipwreck, and who, drying
himself in the security of some alien beach, hesitates, in
a grateful placid lethargy, to begin his hunt for berries
or fruits or fresh water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Detail by detail he reviewed the events of the previous
day; and as the images of all these people—of Miss
Gault, of Darnley, of Mr. Urquhart—passed in procession
before him, he was surprised at the light in which
he saw them, so different from the way in which they
had appeared only some eight or nine hours ago. The
importance of material objects—their mystical importance—had
been his last impression before sleeping; but
now everything appeared in a cold, unmystical light. It
was always thus when he awoke from sleep; but the
fact that he recognized the transitoriness of the mood
did not diminish its power. He was never more cynically
clairvoyant than on these occasions. He surveyed at such
times his dearest friends through a sort of unsympathetic
magnifying-glass in which there was not one of
their frailties that did not stand out in exaggerated relief.
The port-hole, so to speak, of the malign consciousness
through which he saw them was at the same time
telescopic and microscopic. It was surrounded, too, by a
thick, circular obscurity. He was abnormally sensitive
at such times, but with a curtailed and reduced sensibility.
Each particular thing as it presented itself
dominated the whole field of vision. Nor was this sensitiveness
itself an altogether normal receptivity. It was
primarily physiological. It had few nervous chords; and
no spiritual or psychic ones. Everything that approached
it approached it on the bodily plane, as something—even
if it were a mental image—to be actually grasped
with the five senses.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And so, as he lay there, knowing that a long while
must pass before he would have any chance of breakfast
or even of a cup of tea, he made a stronger effort than
usual to get his thoughts into focus. The wet airs blowing
in through the open windows helped him in this
attempt. It was as if he stole away from that little round
port-hole and shuffled off to some upper deck, where he
could feel the wide horizons. His mind kept reverting to
what he had felt during the drive with Darnley, and he
tried to analyze what sort of philosophy it was that remained
with him during all the normal hours when his
“mythology”—his secret spiritual vice—lay quiescent.
He fumbled about in his mind for some clue to his
normal attitude to life—some clue-word that he could
use to describe it, if any of his new friends began questioning
him; and the word he hit upon at last was the
word <span class='it'>fetish-worship</span>. That was it! His normal attitude to
life was just that—or nearer that than anything else!</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a worship of all the separate, mysterious, living
souls he approached: “souls” of grass, trees, stones,
animals, birds, fish; “souls” of planetary bodies and of
the bodies of men and women; the “souls,” even, of all
manner of inanimate little things; the “souls” of all
those strange, chemical groupings that give a living
identity to houses, towns, places, countrysides.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Am I inhuman in some appallingly incurable manner?”
he thought. “Is the affection I have for human
beings less important to me than the shadows of leaves
and the flowing of waters?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He gazed intently at the window-sills of his open windows,
above which the tassels of the blinds swayed to
and fro in the damp gusts of wind. He thought of the
grotesque and obsessed figure of Selena Gault, as she
pulled up plantains from his father’s grave. No! Whatever
this fetish-worship might be, it certainly was different
from “love.” Love was a possessive, feverish,
exacting emotion. It demanded a response. It called for
mutual activity. It entailed responsibility. The thrilling
delight with which he was wont to contemplate his
mother’s face under certain conditions, the deep satisfaction
he derived from the sight of Miss Gault and her
cats, the pleasure with which he had surveyed the blue
eyes and pointed beard of Darnley Otter—these things
had nothing in them that was either possessive or responsible.
And yet he lost all thought of himself in
watching these things, just as he used to do in watching
the mossy roots of the chestnuts and sycamores in the
avenues at Hampton Court! It seemed then that what he
felt for both things and people, as he saw them under
certain lights, was a kind of exultant blending of vision
and sympathy. Their beauty held him in a magical enchantment;
and between his soul and the “soul,” as it
were, of whatever it was he happened to be regarding,
there seemed to be established a tremulous and subtle
reciprocity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was pleased at having thought of the word “fetish-worship”
in this connection. And it was in the pleasure
of this thought that he now leapt out of bed and, putting
on his overcoat, began hurriedly to shave himself,
using as he did so the cold water in his jug.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had not got very far with this, however, when there
was a sound in the passage outside that reminded him
of the rattle of the milk-cans on the Longborne Port
platform. This was followed by a gentle knock at his
door. Opening it cautiously, he was surprised to see Mrs.
Otter herself standing there, while beside her was a wide
tin bath and a can of hot water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I was waiting till I heard you move,” she said. “Darnley
has had his breakfast and gone. He goes to Blacksod
early. Jason does not get up till late. Dimity and I will
be ready for you when you come down.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf hovered at the door, his face lathered, his safety-razor
in his hand. He suddenly felt no better than a
lout in the presence of this faded old lady.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She smiled at him pleasantly. “I hope you’ll be happy
with us,” she said. “You’ll get used to us soon. Poor
Mr. Redfern got quite used to us before he died.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Redfern?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The gentleman who helped the Squire with his book.
But you must have your bath now. Do you think you
can be ready in about half-an-hour?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf bowed his lathered face and she went off. While
he was dragging the bath into his room, she turned at
the head of the stairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Would you like a cup of tea at once, Mr. Solent, or
will you wait till you come down?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll wait, thank you! Thank you <span class='it'>very</span> much!” he
shouted; and jerking both bath and can into his fortress,
he shut the door and prepared to wash and dress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The whole process of his ablution and his dressing
was now a mechanical accompaniment to absent-minded
fantastic thoughts on the subject of the dead Mr. Redfern.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This was the fellow’s room, no doubt,” he said to
himself. “I suppose he died here. A nice death, with those
monstrous pictures lying like lead on his consciousness!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was on Mr. Redfern’s behalf now that Wolf scowled
at the backs of these pictures, as he sponged himself
in the tin bath. Mr. Redfern dominated that half-hour,
to the exclusion of all other thoughts. Wolf saw him
lying stone-dead on the pillows he himself had just
quitted. He saw him as a pale, emaciated youth, with
beautifully moulded features. He wondered if he had
been buried by the person Mr. Urquhart called “Tilly-Valley.”
He decided he would look for his grave in the
King’s Barton churchyard. His dead face took during
that half-hour the most curious forms. It became the
soap. It became the sponge. It became the spilt water
upon the floor. It became the slop-pail. It became the
untidy heap of Wolf’s dress-clothes. Wolf was not relieved
from it, in fact, till he found himself drinking
delicious cups of tea and eating incredibly fresh eggs
under the care of his hostess in their pleasant dining-room.
The pictures here were of the kind that no philosopher
could quarrel with. Old-fashioned prints, old-fashioned
pastels, old-fashioned engravings, gave the
room a spirit that seemed to emerge from centuries of
placidity and stretch out consolatory hands to every
kind of wayfarer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This is <span class='it'>my</span> room,” said Mrs. Otter, looking very
pleased when Wolf explained to her what he felt about
it. “These things came from my own home in Cornwall.
The best things in the house belonged to my husband.
They’re in the drawing-room; very valuable things. But
I like this room myself and I’m glad you do. Mr. Redfern
used to love to read and write at this table. I believe
if he’d done all his work here he’d never have got that
terrible illness. That library of Mr. Urquhart’s was too
learned for him, poor, dear, young man! And he <span class='it'>was</span> so
good-looking! My son Jason used to call him by the
names of all the heathen gods, one after another! Jason
was extremely upset when he died so suddenly.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The visitor to King’s Barton found his attention wandering
several times after this. Mrs. Otter began to drift
into rambling stories about her native Cornwall, and it
was only Wolf’s power of automatically putting a convincing
animation into his heavy countenance that prevented
her from realizing how far away his thoughts
had flown.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hostess and guest were interrupted in their rather
one-sided tête-à-tête by the sound of footsteps descending
the stairs. Mrs. Otter jumped up at once.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s Jason!” she cried. “We must have disturbed him.
I was talking too much. I’ll go and tell Dimity she need
not clear away. I expect Jason will like to have a smoke
with you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She disappeared through the door into the kitchen at
the very moment when her elder son entered the room.
Wolf was astonished at the difference between the figure
he had seen the night before and the figure he rose to
shake hands with now. Dressed in neat, dark-blue serge,
Jason Otter had the quiet, self-composed air of a much-travelled
man of the world. His clean-shaven face,
framed by prematurely grey hair, was massively and yet
abnormally expressive. Forehead and chin were imposing
and commanding; but this effect was diminished and
almost negated by the peculiar kind of restless misery
displayed in the lines of the mouth. The man’s eyes were
large and grey; and instead of glancing aside in the way
Darnley’s did, they seemed to cry out for help without
cessation or intermission.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He and Wolf sat opposite each other at Mr. Redfern’s
favourite table, and, lighting their cigarettes, looked
each other up and down in silence. Jason Otter was decidedly
nervous. Wolf saw his hand shaking as he lit a
match.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was, indeed, something almost indecent about
the sensitiveness of this man’s lined and indented face.
It made Wolf feel as though at all costs the possessor of
such a countenance must be protected from nervous
shocks. Was it in taking care of him that Darnley’s blue
eyes had acquired their curious expression? Jason’s own
eyes were not tragic. They were something worse. They
were exposed; they were stripped bare; they seemed to
peer forth helplessly from the human skull behind them,
as though some protective filaments that ought to have
been there were <span class='it'>not</span> there!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I saw you’d turned our pictures to the wall,” he began,
fixing his pleading eyes upon Wolf’s face as if
asking for permission to humble himself to the ground.
“I’ll have them taken away. I’ll have them put in the
privy or in the passage.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, it’s all right, Mr. Otter,” returned Wolf. “It’s
only that I never can sleep in a room with large pictures.
It’s a peculiarity of mine.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>No sooner had Jason heard this expression, “a peculiarity
of mine,” than his whole visage changed. A
childish mischievousness illuminated his pallid physiognomy,
and he chuckled audibly, nodding his head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A peculiarity? That’s excellent. That’s what Bluebeard
used to say. ‘It’s a peculiarity of mine.’ I think
that’s one of the prettiest excuses I’ve ever heard.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This explosion was so surprising to Wolf that all he
could do was to open his mouth and stare at the man.
But the humour passed as quickly as it had come. The
face unwrinkled itself. The eyes became supplicatory.
The mouth tightened in solemn misery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t want anyone to be bothered about the moving
of those pictures, Mr. Otter,” said Wolf; for he
seemed to see with terrible distinctness the devoted lady
of the house struggling alone with those heavy frames.
“You must allow me to do it myself. In fact,” he went
on, in what he tried to make a casual, airy tone, “I’m
going to beg Mrs. Otter to let me treat that room as if it
were an unfurnished flat of my own.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The head opposite him was so grey that he felt as if
he were addressing this hint to Mrs. Otter’s husband
rather than to her son.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Very gently, moving delicately, like Agag before Samuel,
Jason rose to his feet. “I think we’d better get those
pictures changed now,” he whispered earnestly, in a
grave, conspiring voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf tried to retain his airy, casual manner in the
face of this gravity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll do it like a shot,” he said, rising and moving towards
the door. “Just tell me where to put them!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two men went up together, and under Jason’s directions
the Landseer and the Alma-Tadema were deposited
in a vacant room at the back of the pantry.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come upstairs for a minute,” said Mr. Otter, when
this transaction was completed; and stepping softly and
quietly, as if there were a dead person somewhere in the
house, he led the way into his own room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt the same uneasy sensations in this chamber
as he had experienced the evening before. Sinking into
a luxurious armchair and accepting a cigarette, he found
himself bold enough to make a faint protest against his
host’s Arundel prints, whose ceremonious piety he found
so distasteful.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I couldn’t work in this room,” he murmured—and
felt as he spoke that his tone was cantankerous and impolite.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Jason Otter showed not the least annoyance or
even surprise at his guest’s rudeness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I expect not! I expect not!” he cried cheerfully.
“There are few people who <span class='it'>could</span>. I myself could work
in a church or in a museum. I welcome anything that
acts as a shield. It’s like having a band of retainers, a
sort of papal guard, to keep the populace at bay.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he spoke, he looked proudly and complacently
round the room, as if conscious of the protection of the
antique French chair in which he had ensconced himself.
There was a Boule table at his side, and he proceeded
to dust it with a large silk handkerchief.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I suppose you’ve never read any books on Hindoo
mythology?” he said suddenly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The word “mythology” gave Wolf an uncomfortable
shock. He felt as a Catholic might feel if he heard a
Methodist refer to the Virgin Mary.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He shook his head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve only read one myself,” went on the poet, with
a chuckle; “so you needn’t feel a fool. It was by that
man who went to Thibet. But in it he mentions Mukalog,
the god of rain.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The god of rain?” responded Wolf, beginning to feel
reassured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s what the man says,” continued the other. “Of
course, we know what these travellers are; but he had a
lot of letters after his name, so I suppose he passed
some examination.” Jason put his hand in front of his
mouth as he said this; and his face was wrinkled with
amusement. “He knows Latin, anyway. He brings it in
on the first page,” he added.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It sounds like a real idol .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mukalog, the god of
rain .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” murmured Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason’s countenance suddenly grew solemn and confidential.
“I’ve got it here,” he whispered. “I bought it
for thirty shillings from Mr. Malakite, the bookseller.
<span class='it'>He</span> bought it at a sale from some fool who thought it
was nothing.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It’s brought me all my luck.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
He lowered his voice still further, so that Wolf could
scarcely hear him. “These priests look for God in the
clouds, but I never do that.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I look for Him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I beg your pardon?” questioned Wolf, leaning attentively
forward. “You say you look for Him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a pause; and the expression of the man
changed from extreme gravity to hobgoblinish humour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>In the mud!</span>” he shouted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then, once more grave, he rose to his feet and fetched
from its pedestal a hideous East Indian idol, about six
inches high, and placed it in the middle of the Boule
table, just opposite Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s his stomach that makes him so shocking,” said
Jason Otter; “but the ways of God aren’t as dainty
as those of the Bishop of Salisbury. In this world Truth
flies downward, not upward!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hardly aware of what he was doing, so occupied was
his mind with the whole problem of his host’s personality,
Wolf rose, and, leaning over the table, picked up
Mukalog, the god of rain. Holding it absent-mindedly
in his fingers for a while, he finally made a foolish
schoolboy-like attempt to balance it upside-down on the
flat skull of its monstrous head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This proceeding brought a flash of real anger into
Jason’s eyes. He snatched the thing away with a nervous
clutch, and, hurrying to the back of the room, replaced
it on its jade pedestal, which Wolf noticed now,
with no great surprise, was standing near a carved brazier
containing some still-smouldering ashes—doubtless
the ashes of that very incense which had to be “ordered
from the Stores”!</p>

<p class='pindent'>While his host returned in silence to his French chair
and in profound dejection took out his cigarette-case,
Wolf, still staring in a sort of hypnotized trance at the
“god of rain,” set himself to wonder why it was that the
kind of evil which emanated from this idol should be
so much more distasteful than the kind of evil that
emanated from Mr. Urquhart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He came to the conclusion that although it is impossible
for any living human being to obliterate all elements
of good from itself, it is possible for an artist, or
for a writer, or even for the anonymous creative energy
of the race itself, to create an image of evil that should
be <span class='it'>entirely evil</span>.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But why should this Hindoo idol seem so much more
sinister than any Chinese or Japanese monster? Was it
because in India the cult of spirituality, both for good
and evil, had been carried to a greater length than anywhere
else in the world?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’d better not listen to any tales about me that
old Urquhart tells you,” said the poet suddenly, fixing
his sorrowful eyes upon the visitor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The name of his employer made Wolf rise hurriedly
from his armchair.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Certainly not,” he said brusquely, moving to the
door. As he placed his hand on the door-handle, he felt
as though the evil spirit of Mukalog were serpentining
towards him over the poet’s shoulders and over the
smooth Boule table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m not one to listen to tales from anyone, Mr. Otter,”
he said as he went out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He crossed the landing and entered his own room.
Now that he was alone, he fell into a very grave meditation,
as he slowly laced up his boots. “No wonder,” he
said to himself, “that poor chap Redfern committed suicide!
What with this man’s demon and Mr. Urquhart’s
devilish History, this place doesn’t seem a paradisal retreat.
Well! Well! We shall see what we shall see.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He carried his coat and hat quietly downstairs and
managed to get out of the house unobserved by either
Mrs. Otter or the old servant.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The current of his mood was running more normally
and gently by the time he found himself being escorted
by his eccentric employer to the great isolated library
which was now to be the scene of his labours. His dream
of the writing-table by a mullioned window “blushing
with the blood of kings and queens” turned out to be
a literal presentiment. The view he got from his seat
at that window surpassed the Gainsborough itself. The
manor-garden melted away into herbaceous terraces and
shadowy orchards. These in their turn faded into a green
pasture-land, on the further side of which, faint in the
distance, he could make out the high ridge of ploughed
fields along the top of which ran the main road from
Blacksod to Ramsgard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart, however, seemed in a fussy, preoccupied,
fidgetty mood that morning. He kept bringing
books from the shelves and placing them on his secretary’s
table; and then, after he had opened them and
read a passage or two, muttering “That’s good, isn’t it?
That’s the kind of thing we want, isn’t it?” he would
return them to the shelves and bring back others. Wolf
was not very much helped by these manœuvres. In fact,
he was teased and nonplussed. He was anxious to find
out exactly how much of a free hand he was going to
be allowed, and he was also anxious to find out what
definite ideas the Squire of King’s Barton already had.
This erratic tumbling about of old folios, this hunting
for nothing but whimsical and scandalous passages,
seemed waste of time on that first morning.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Have you any plan, any synopsis made out, Sir, such
as I could enlarge upon?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>These words greeted Mr. Urquhart, when, with a satyrish
leer on his face and a thick folio pressed against
his stomach, he came limping up to the table for the
fourth or fifth time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Eh? What’s that? ‘Plan’ did you say? ‘Synopsis’
did you say? By Jove! my young friend, I mustn’t make
such a tosspot of ’ee again the night before we set to
work. Didn’t I make it clear to you that our book was
going to develop along organic lines, not along logical
lines? Didn’t I make it clear that what we had to aim
at was something quite new, an altogether new <span class='it'>genre</span>;
and that it was to represent the pell-mell of life? It’s a
sort of Diary of the Dead we’re aiming at, Solent. Your
plans and your skeletons would spoil it utterly. What
I want you to do is to saturate yourself with Dorset
Chronicles, especially the more scandalous of them—the
old houses, Solent, the old houses!—and then, when
you’ve got the drift of it in your blood, what we’ll aim
at shall be a sort of West Country ‘Comédie Humaine.’
Do you get my meaning? What you’ve got to do now,
Solent, is to help me collect material and to take notes.
I’ll show you my notes tomorrow. They’ll make my
meaning clearer. The <span class='it'>last</span> thing we must think of is arrangement.
My book must grow like a living thing, till
it frightens us by its reality.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf listened patiently and dutifully to this discourse.
What he thought in his mind was: “This whole business
is evidently just an old man’s hobby. I must give up any
idea of taking it seriously. I must play with it, just as
he’s playing with it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>With this intention in his mind, as soon as he was
alone in his window, he spread open before him that
monument of scurrilous scandal, “The History of the
Abbotsbury Family,” and gave himself up to leisurely
note-making. He transcribed in as lively a way as he
could the most outrageous of the misdeeds of this remarkable
race, as they are narrated by the sly Doctor
Tarrant. He exaggerated, where it was possible, the Doctor’s
unctuous commentaries, and he added a few of his
own. He began before long to think that the Squire was
not so devoid of all sagacity in this unusual method as
he had at first supposed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Half the morning had already passed in this way
when Mr. Urquhart came limping in in a state of impetuous
excitement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must send you off at once to Blacksod,” he began.
“Eh? What? You don’t mind walking a few miles, eh?
Roger says he can’t spare the trap. You can lunch in
the town at my expense. I’ve got a bill at the Three Peewits;
and you can come back at your leisure. You don’t
object, eh? It’s nothing for a young man like you, and
there’s very good ale at the Peewits.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf folded up his notes and replaced Doctor Tarrant’s
History. He expressed himself as more than delighted
to walk to Blacksod, and he enquired what it
was that Mr. Urquhart wanted done.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, there are two things that have come up, both
of them rather important. I’ve just heard from my bookseller
down there. You’ll easily find him. His name’s
Malakite. He’s in Cerne Street. He says he’s got hold of
the Evershot Letters. That’s the book for us, Solent!
Privately printed and full of allusions to the Brambledown
Case! He says there’s a man in London after it
already. That may be a lie. You’ll have to find out.
Sometimes Malakite’s let me have the use of a book and
then sold it afterwards. You’ll have to find out, Solent.
Eh? What? You’ll have to be a diplomatist, a Talleyrand,
and that sort of thing, eh?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf composed his countenance as intelligently as he
could and enquired what the other thing was.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart lifted his eyebrows, as if the question
had been impertinent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The other thing?” he murmured dreamily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the next moment, as Wolf leaned back against the
arm of his chair and looked straight into the man’s eyes,
there was a startling change in that supercilious face.
A flicker, a shadow, a nothing, passed from one to the
other; one of those exposures of secret thoughts that
seem to bring together levels of consciousness beyond
rational thought. It was all over in a moment; and with
a quick alteration of his position, and a shuffling of his
stick, the lame man recovered his composure.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ah yes,” he murmured, with a smiling inclination of
his head that resembled the bow of a great gentleman
confessing a lapse of memory. “Ah yes, you are perfectly
right, Solent. There <span class='it'>was</span> another little thing that
you might as well attend to while you’re about it. It’s
not of any pressing importance; but, as I say, if you
have time, and feel energetic, it might be a good thing
to jolt the memory of Mr. Torp. Eh? What’s that? Torp,
the stone-cutter. Torp of Chequers Street. You’ll easily
find the fellow. He’s a jack-of-all-trades—does undertaking
and grave-digging as well as stone-cutting.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart became silent, but the expression upon
his face was like that of some courtly prince-prelate of
old times, who desired his subordinate to obey instructions
that he was unwilling to put into vulgar speech.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Torp?” repeated Wolf, patiently and interrogatively.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Just a little matter of a headstone,” went on the
other. “Tilly-Valley’s quarrelled with our sexton here.
So I’ve had to use Torp as both sexton and undertaker.
He has been disgracefully dilatory.” Mr. Urquhart shuffled
to the bookcase, leaning heavily on his stick. He
changed the position of one or two of the books; and as
he did so, with his back to his secretary, he finished his
sentence. “He’s been as dilatory about Redfern’s headstone
as he was about digging his grave.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once more there was a silence in the library of King’s
Barton Manor. But when the Squire turned round, he
seemed in the best of spirits. “It’s not your job, of course,
this kind of thing. But I’m an old man and I don’t think
you’re touchy about trifles. Jog the memory of the good
Torp, then, will you? What? Jolt the torpid Torp.
That’s the word, eh? Tell the beggar in good clear
English that I’ll go to Dorchester for that stone if he
doesn’t set it up within the week. You can do that for me,
Solent? But it’s not important. If it’s a bother, let it go!
But have a good luncheon at the Three Peewits anyway!
Make ’em give ’ee their own ale. It’s good. It’s
excellent. That individual down at Pond Cottage gets
drunk on it every night, Monk tells me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Turning again to the bookcase, Mr. Urquhart made
as though the conversation had terminated; and Wolf,
after a moment or two of that awkward hesitation which
a subordinate feels when he is uncertain as to what particular
gesture of parting is required, went straight out
of the room, without a word, and ran downstairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had found his hat and stick, and was on the point
of letting himself out of the house, when the little side-door
leading to the kitchen hurriedly opened, and Roger
Monk made himself visible. He did this with the precipitation
of a man reckless with anxiety, and he plunged
at once into rapid speech.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll excuse me, Mr. Solent, for troubling you, but
the truth of the matter is, Sir, that this house will be
upset by breakfast-time tomorrow, unless you—unless
you—would be so kind, Sir, as to help Mrs. Martin and
myself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What on earth is coming now?” thought Wolf. “These
King’s Barton servants seem pretty hard put to it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tisn’t as though I didn’t know that it’s above my
province to speak,” went on the agitated man. “But
speak I must; and if you’re the kind of young gentleman
I think you are, you’ll listen to my words.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf contemplated the swarthy giant, who, dressed in
his gardener’s-clothes, with bare throat and bare arms,
had the torso of a classical athlete. Beads of perspiration
stood out on his forehead, and his great sunburnt
hands made weak fumbling gestures in the air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Certainly, Roger. By all means, Roger. I shall be
delighted to help you and Mrs. Martin in any way I can.
What is it I can do for you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tall servant’s face relaxed instantaneously, and he
smiled sweetly. His smile was like the smile of some
melancholy slave in a Greek play. His voice sank into a
confidential whisper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s sausages, Sir, asking you to excuse me, it’s sausages.
Mr. Urquhart <span class='it'>has</span> to have ’em these days for
breakfast, and there ain’t none of ’em in the house; and
I am too set out, what with horses to clean and artichokes
to plant and pigs in the yard to feed, to go to
town myself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf smiled in as grave and well-bred a manner as
he could. “I’ll be very glad to bring you home some
sausages, Monk,” he said amiably.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“At Weevil’s,” cried the other, full of relief and joy.
“At Weevil’s in High Street. And be sure you get fresh
ones, Mr. Solent. Tell Bob Weevil they’re for me. He
knows me and I know him. Don’t mention Squire. Say
they’re for Mr. Monk. He’ll know! Two pounds of sausages;
and you can tell Weevil to put ’em down. Thank
’ee more than I can say, Sir, for doing this. It eases a
man’s mind. I was downright distraught in thinking of
it. Squire’s like that. What he puts his heart on he puts
his heart on, and none can turn him. I’ve been with other
gentlemen—mostly in stable-work you understand—but
I’ve never worked for one like Squire. Doesn’t do to
contravene Squire when his heart is fixed, and so I thank
’ee kindly, Mr. Solent.” And the man vanished with the
same precipitation with which he appeared.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf set out down the drive in extremely good spirits.
Nothing suited him better than to have the day to himself.
It seemed to extend before him, this day, and gather
volume and freedom, as if it were many days rolled
into one. It didn’t worry him that it was Friday. The
nature of the day, its cloudiness, its gustiness, its greyness,
suited his mood completely. It seemed to carry
his mind far, far back—back beyond any definite recollections.
The look of the oak palings; the look of the
mud; the look of the branches, with their scarcely
budded embryo leaves swaying in the wind—all these
things hit his imagination with a sudden accumulated
force. He rubbed his hands; he prodded the ground
with his stick; he strode forward with great strides.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This melancholy day, with its gustily blown elm-branches,
seemed to extend itself before him along a road
that was something more than an ordinary road. Fragmentary
images, made up out of fantastic names—the
name of Torp, the name of Malakite—hovered in front
of him, mingled with the foam of dark-brown ale and
the peculiar, bare, smooth look of uncooked sausages.
And over and above such images floated the ambiguous
presence of his father, William Solent. He felt as if
everything that might chance to happen on this grey
phantom-like day would happen under the direct influence
of this dead man. He loved his father at that
moment, not with any idealistic emotion, but with an
earthy, sensual, heathen piety which allowed for much
equivocal indulgence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At the foot of the drive he turned into Lenty Lane,
passing at the corner a trim little cottage, whose garden
of rich black earth was full of daffodils. He stopped
for a moment to stare at the window of this neat lodge—thinking
in his mind, “That must be where Roger Monk
lives”—and without being seriously disturbed, he was a
little startled when, by reason of some impish trick of
light and shade, it seemed to him that he saw an image
of himself standing just inside one of the lower windows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But he walked on in undiminished good spirits, and
in about a quarter of an hour found himself in the
centre of the village of King’s Barton.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All the cottages he saw here had protective cornices,
carved above windows and doors, chiselled and moulded
with as much elaboration as if they were ornamenting
some noble mansion or abbey. Many of these cottage-doors
stood ajar, as Wolf passed by, and it was easy for
him to observe their quaintly furnished interiors: the
china dogs upon the mantelpieces, the grandfather’s-clocks,
the highly-coloured lithographs of war and religion,
the shining pots and pans, the well-scrubbed deal
tables, the deeply indented wooden steps leading to the
rooms above. Almost all of them had large flagstones, of
the same mellow, yellowish tint, laid between the doorstep
and the path; and in many cases this stone was as
deeply hollowed out, under the passing feet of the generations,
as was the actual doorstep which rose above it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Beyond these cottages his road led him past the low
wall of the parish-church. Here he stopped for a while
to view the graves and to enjoy the look of that solid
and yet proud edifice whose massive masonry and tall
square tower gathered up into themselves so many of
the characteristics of that countryside.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf wondered vaguely in what part of the churchyard
his predecessor’s body lay—that hiding-place without
a headstone! He also wondered whether by some
stroke of good luck he should get a glimpse of that submissive
clergyman, satirically styled “Tilly-Valley,” pottering
about the place.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the church remained lonely and unfrequented at
that mid-morning hour. Nothing moved there but a heavy
rack of dark-grey, wind-blown clouds, sailing swiftly
above the four foliated pinnacles that rose from the corners
of the tower. Close to the church he perceived what
was evidently the parsonage; but there was no sign of
life there either.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The cottages grew more scattered now. Some of them
were really small dairy-farms, through the gates of whose
muddy yards he could see pigs and poultry, and sometimes
a young bull or an excited flock of geese.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At last he had passed the last house of the village
and was drifting leisurely along a lonely country road.
The hedges were already in full leaf; but many of the
trees, especially the oaks and ashes, were yet quite bare.
The ditches on both sides of the road contained gleaming
patches of celandines.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As Wolf walked along, an extraordinary happiness
took possession of him. He seemed to derive satisfaction
from the mere mechanical achievement of putting
one foot in front of the other. It seemed a delicious
privilege to him merely to feel his boots sinking in the
wet mud—merely to feel the gusts of cold air blowing
upon his face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He asked himself lazily why it was that he found
nature, especially this simple pastoral nature that made
no attempt to be grandiose or even picturesque, so much
more thrilling than any human society he had ever met.
He felt as if he enjoyed at that hour some primitive life-feeling
that was identical with what these pollarded elms
felt, against whose ribbed trunks the gusts of wind were
blowing, or with what these shiny celandine-leaves felt,
whose world was limited to tree-roots and fern-fronds
and damp, dark mud!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The town of Blacksod stands in the midst of a richly
green valley, at the point where the Dorsetshire Blackmore
Vale, following the loamy banks of the river Lunt,
carries its umbrageous fertility into the great Somersetshire
plain. Blacksod is not only the centre of a large
agricultural district; it is the energetic and bustling
emporium of many small but enterprising factories.
Cheeses are made here and also shoes. Sausages are
made here and also leather gloves. Ironmongers, saddlers,
shops dealing in every sort of farm-implement
and farm-produce, abound in the streets of Blacksod side
by side with haberdashers, grocers, fishmongers; and up
and down its narrow pavements farmers and labourers
jostle with factory-hands and burgesses.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After walking for about two miles, Wolf became conscious
that this lively agglomeration of West Country
trade was about to reveal itself. The hedges became
lower, the ditches shallower, the blackbirds and thrushes
less voluble. Neat little villas began to appear at the
roadside, with trim but rather exposed gardens, where
daffodils nodded with a splendid negligence, as if ready
in their royal largesse to do what they could for the
patient clerks and humble shop-assistants who had
weeded the earth about their proud stems.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Soon there began to be manifested certain signs of
borough traffic. Motor-cars showed themselves and even
motor-lorries. Bakers’ carts and butchers’ carts came
swiftly past him. He overtook maids and mothers returning
from shopping, with perambulators where the
infant riders were almost lost beneath the heaps of parcels
piled up around them. He observed a couple of
tramps taking off their boots under the hedge, their long
brown peevish fingers untwisting dirty linen, their furtive
suspicious eyes watching the passers-by with the
look of sick jackals.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then he found himself in an actual street. It was
a new street, composed of spick-and-span jerry-built
houses, each exactly like the other. But it gave Wolf a
mysterious satisfaction. The neatness, the abnormal
cleanliness of the brickwork and of the wretched sham-Gothic
ornamentation did not displease him. The little
gardens, behind low, brightly painted, wooden palings,
were delicious to him, with their crocuses and jonquils
and budding polyanthuses.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He surveyed these little houses and gardens—doubtless
the homes of artisans and factory-hands—with a
feeling of almost maudlin delight. He imagined himself
as living in one of these places, and he realized exactly
with what deep sensual pleasure he would enjoy the
rain and the intermittent sunshine. There would be nothing
artistic or over-cluttered there, to prevent every
delicate vibration of air and sky from reaching the skin
of his very soul. He loved the muslin curtains over the
parlour-windows, and the ferns and flowerpots on the
window-sills. He loved the quaint names of these little
toy houses—names like Rosecot, Woodbine, Bankside,
Primrose Villa. He tried to fancy what it would be like
to sit in the bow-window of any one of these, drinking
tea and eating bread-and-honey, while the Spring afternoon
slowly darkened towards twilight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He roused himself presently from these imaginations
to observe that some of the real business of the town was
becoming manifest. The little houses began to be interspersed
with wood-sheds and timber-yards, by grocers’
shops and coal-yards. He became alert now—that faint
sort of “second-sight,” which almost all contemplative
people possess, warning him that Mr. Torp’s establishment
was not far off. He knew he was in Chequers Street.
It only remained for him to keep his eyes open. He
walked very slowly now, peering at the yards and shops
on both sides of the road; and as he walked, a curious
trance-like sensation came over him, the nature of which
was very complicated, though no doubt it had something
to do with the emptiness of his stomach. But it took
the form of making him feel as if he were retracing some
sequence of events through which long ago he had already
passed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ah! There it was! “Torp, Stone-Cutter.” He gazed
with interest at the various monuments for the dead,
which lay about on the ground or stood erect and challenging
against the wall. It produced a queer impression,
this crowd of anonymous tombstones, the owners
and possessors whereof even now cheerfully walking
about the earth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must get this Torp to show me what he’s done for
poor Redfern,” he thought, as he passed on to the door
of the house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He knocked at the door and was so instantaneously
admitted that it was with a certain degree of confusion
that he found himself in the very heart of the stone-cutter’s
household.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They had evidently just finished their midday meal.
Mrs. Torp, a lean, cadaverous woman, was clearing the
table. The stone-cutter himself, a plump, lethargic man,
with a whimsical eye, was smoking his pipe by the
fire. A handsome boy of about eleven, who had evidently
just opened the door to let himself out, fell back now
and stared at the stranger with a bold impertinence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What can I do for ’ee, Sir?” said Mr. Torp, not
making any attempt to rise, but smiling amiably at the
intruder.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Get on! Get off! Don’t worry the gentleman, Lob!”
murmured the woman to the spellbound boy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then it was that Wolf became aware of another
member of the family.</p>

<p class='pindent'>No sooner was he conscious of her presence than he
felt himself becoming as speechless with astonishment
as the boy was at his own appearance. She sat on a
stool opposite her father, leaning her shoulders against
the edge of a high-backed settle. She was a young girl
of about eighteen, and her beauty was so startling that
it seemed to destroy in a moment all ordinary human
relations. Her wide-open grey eyes were fringed with
long, dark eyelashes. Her voluptuous throat resembled
an arum lily before it has unsheathed its petals. She
wore a simple close-fitting dress, more suited to the
summer than to a chilly day in spring; but the peculiarity
of this dress lay in the way it emphasized the
extraordinary suppleness of her shoulders and the delicate
Artemis-like beauty of her young breasts.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve come from King’s Barton,” began Wolf, moving
towards the stone-cutter. “I believe I have the honour
to have taken the place of the gentleman for whom you
have just designed one of your monuments.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sit ’ee down, Mister. Sit ’ee down, Sir!” cried the man
cheerfully. “Give the gentleman a chair, Missus!” He
spoke in a tone that implied that his own obesity must
be accepted as a pleasant excuse for his retaining a
sitting-posture.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mrs. Torp had already left the room with a tray;
and Wolf, as he seated himself with his face to the girl,
could hear the woman muttering viciously to herself
and clattering angrily with the plates behind the kitchen-door—a
door she seemed to have left open on purpose,
so that she might combine the pleasure of listening to
the conversation with the pleasure of disturbing it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Missus be cantiferous wi’ I ’cos them ’taties be so
terrible rotted,” remarked the man, in a loud, hoarse
whisper, leaning forward towards his guest and confidentially
tapping his knee with his pipe. “And them
onions what she been and cooked all morning, she’ve
a-boiled all taste out o’ they. Them onions might as well
be hog-roots for all the Christian juice what be left in
’un.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf, who had found it difficult to keep his eyes away
from the girl by the settle, now suddenly became aware
that she was fully conscious of his agitation and was
regarding him with grave amusement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I suppose <span class='it'>you</span> don’t do any of the cooking?” he
said, rather faintly, meeting her gaze.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She changed her position into one that emphasized
her beauty with a kind of innocent wantonness, smiled
straight into his eyes, but remained silent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She?” put in her father. “Save us and help us!
Gerda do the cooking? Why, Mister, that girl ain’t got
the gumption to comb her own hair. That’s the Lord’s
own truth, Mister, what I’m telling ’ee. She ain’t got the
durned consideration to comb her own hair; and it
be mighty silky, too, when it be combed out. But her
mother have to do it. There ain’t nothing in this blessed
house what that poor woman hasn’t to do; and her own
daughter sitting round, strong as a May-pole.—Now
you be off to school, Lob Torp! Don’t yer trouble the
gentleman.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This last remark was due to the fact that the handsome
boy had edged himself quite close to Wolf and
was gazing at him with a mixture of admiration and
insolence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What be that on your chain?” he enquired. “Be that
a real girt seal, like what King John throwed into the
Wash?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf put his arm round the child’s waist; but as he
did so, he looked steadily at Gerda. At that moment
Mrs. Torp re-entered the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, John?” she said. “Aren’t yer going into
the yard? That stone for Mr. Manley’s mother’s been
waiting since Sunday. He comes to see ’un five times a
day. He’ll be a crazed-man like, if ’tisn’t up afore tomorrow.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf rose to his feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What shall I tell Mr. Urquhart about the headstone
for Mr. Redfern?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He uttered these words in a more decided and less
propitiatory tone than he had yet used, and all the
family stared at him with placid surprise.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, that!” cried Mr. Torp. “So you came about that,
did yer? I had thought maybe you knowed some
wealthy folk out in country what had a waiting corpse.
Do ’ee come from these parts, Mister, or be ’ee from
Lunnon, as this ’ere Redfern were? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Lunnon, eh?
Well, ’tis strange that two young men same as you be
should come to Blacksod; and both be Lunnoners! But
that’s what I tells our Gerda here. Maids what won’t
help their mothers in house, maids what do nought but
walk out wi’ lads, had best be in Lunnon their own
selves! That there Metropolis must be summat wonderful
to look at, I reckon. I expect they makes their own
moniments in them parts?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf nodded, with a shrug of his shoulders, to imply
that there was little need at present for Mr. Torp to
think of extending his activities.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Could you show me what you’ve done for Redfern?”
he asked abruptly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, there ain’t no harm in that, is there, Missus?”
said the stone-cutter, looking appealingly at his wife.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Best show him,” said the lady briefly. “Best show
him. But let ’un understand that Mr. Manley’s mother
is what comes first.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The obese stone-cutter rose with an effort and led
the way into the yard. Wolf stepped aside to permit
the girl to follow her father; and as she passed him, she
gave him a glance that resembled the sudden trembling
of a white-lilac branch, heavy with rain and sweetness.
Her languorous personality dominated the whole occasion
for him; and as he watched her swaying body
moving between those oblong stones in that cold enclosure,
the thought rose within him that if his subterranean
vice couldn’t find a place for loveliness like
this, there must be something really inhuman in its exactions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>With an incredible rapidity he began laying plots to
see this girl again. Did Mr. Urquhart know of her existence?
Had Darnley Otter ever seen her? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. He was
roused from his amorous thoughts by an abrupt gesture
of Mr. Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There ’a be!” said the carver. “ ’Tis Ham Hill stone,
as Squire Urquhart said for’n to be. I does better jobs
in marble; and marble’s what most of ’em likes. But
that’s the order; and the young gent what it’s chipped
for can’t help ’isself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf regarded the upright yellow slab, upon the top
of which was a vigorous “Here Lies,” and at the foot of
which was an even more vigorous “John Torp, Monument-Maker.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You haven’t got very far, Mr. Torp,” he remarked
drily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Won’t take me more’n a couple o’ afternoons to finish
it up,” replied the other. “And you can tell Mr. Urquhart
that as soon as Mr. Manley be satisfied—Mr. Manley
of Willum’s Mill, tell ’un!—I’ll get to work on his
young friend and make a clean job of he.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There did not seem any excuse just then for prolonging
this interview. Wolf’s mind hurried backwards and
forwards like a rat trying to find a hole into a pantry.
He thought, “Would they let her show me the way to
the Three Peewits?” and then immediately afterwards
he thought, “They’ll send the boy, and I’ll never get rid
of him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the end he went off with an abruptness that was
almost rude. He patted Lob on the head, nodded at the
stone-cutter, plunged into the eyes of Gerda as a diver
plunges into water, and strode away down Chequers
Street.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was not long before he was seated at a spotless
white cloth in the commercial dining-room of the famous
West Country inn. In front of him rose a massive
mahogany sideboard, which served as a sort of sacred
pedestal for the ancient silver plate of three generations
of sagacious landlords. In the centre of this silver
were two symbolic objects—an immense uncut ham,
adorned with a white paper frill, and a large half-eaten
apple-tart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was so late for luncheon that he and a solitary
waiter had the whole dusky, sober room entirely to themselves.
They were, however, looked down upon by the
ferocious eye of a stuffed pike and by the supercilious
eye of Queen Victoria, who, wearing the blue ribbon of
the Garter, conveyed, but only by the flicker of an eyelid,
her ineffable disdain for all members of the human
race who were not subjects of the House of Hanover.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And as he lingered over his meal, drinking that dark,
foamy liquor that seemed the dedicated antidote to a
grey March day, he permitted his fancy to run riot with
the loveliness of Gerda Torp. How remarkable that she
had never once opened her lips! And yet in her silence
she had compelled both that room and that yard to serve
as mere frames to her personality. He tilted back in his
chair, and pressed the palms of his hands against the
edge of the table, revolving every detail of that queer
scene, and becoming so absorbed that it was only after
a perceptible interval that he began to taste the cigarettes
which he went on unconsciously smoking.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl was not the particular physical type that
appealed to him most, or that had, whenever he had
come across it, the most provocative effect upon his
senses; but the effect upon him of a beauty so overpowering,
so absolute in its flawlessness, was great enough
to sweep out of sight all previous predilections. And
now, as he conjured up the vision of what she was like,
it seemed that nothing more desirable could possibly
happen to him than to enjoy such beauty.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He made up his mind that by hook or by crook he
would possess her. He knew perfectly well that he could
not, properly speaking, be said to have fallen in love
with her. He was like a man who suddenly finds out that
he has suffered all his life from thirst, and simultaneously
with this discovery stumbles upon a cool cellar
of the rarest wine. To have caught sight of her at
all was to be dominated by an insatiable craving for
her—a craving that made him feel as if he had some
sixth sense, some sense that <span class='it'>must</span> be satisfied by the possession
of her, and that nothing but the possession of
her <span class='it'>could</span> satisfy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Drugged and dazed with the Three Peewits’ ale and
with these amorous contemplations, Wolf sat on beneath
that picture of Queen Victoria in a species of erotic
trance. His rugged face, with its high cheek-bones and
hawk-like nose, nodded over his plate with half-shut
lecherous eyes. Every now and then he ran his fingers
through his short, stiff, fair hair, till it stood up erect
upon his head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, well,” he said to himself at last, “this won’t
do!” And rising abruptly from his chair, he gave the
waiter, who, in his preoccupation had been to him a mere
white blur above a black coat, an extravagant tip—half-a-crown,
in fact—and, taking up his hat and stick, told
them to put down his meal to Mr. Urquhart’s account,
and stepped out into the street.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The cold, gusty wind, when he got outside, cleared
his brain at once. He made up his mind that he would
leave the bookseller to the last; and, stopping one of the
passers-by, he enquired the way to Weevil’s grocery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Never did he forget that first lingering stroll through
the centre of Blacksod! The country people seemed to
be doing their shopping as if it were some special <span class='it'>fête</span>.
Parsons, squires, farmers, villagers—all were receiving
obsequious and yet quizzical welcome from the sly shopkeepers
and their irresponsible assistants. The image of
Gerda Torp moved with him as he drifted slowly
through this animated scene. Her sweetness flowed
through his senses and flowed out around him, heightening
his interest in everything he looked at, making
everything seem rich and mellow, as if it were seen
through a diffused golden light, like that of the pictures
of Claude Lorraine.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And all the while over the slate roofs the great grey
clouds rushed upon their arbitrary way. His spirit, drunk
with the sweetness of Gerda and the fumes of the Three
Peewits’ ale, rose in exultation to follow those clouds.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Whirling along with them in this exultant freedom
of his spirit, while his human figure with its oak walking-stick
tapped the edge of the pavement, he felt a queer
need, now, to carry this maddeningly sweet burden of
his to that mound in the Ramsgard cemetery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>He</span> would chuckle over this,” thought Wolf, as he
recalled that profane death-bed cry. “<span class='it'>He</span> would push me
on to snatch most scandalously at this girl, let the result
be as it may!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind dropped now like a leaden plummet into
all manner of erotic thoughts. Would her silence go
on .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. with its indrawing magnetic secrecy .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. even
if he were making love to her? Would that glaucous
greyness in her eyes darken, or grow more luminous, as
he caressed her? Gerda certainly couldn’t be called a
“peeled willow-wand,” for her limbs were rounded
and voluptuous, just as her face had something of that
lethargic sulkiness that is seen sometimes in ancient
Greek sculpture.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was just at this point that, looking round for a
suitable person to enquire of again concerning the
sausage-shop, he felt himself jerked by the elbow; and
there, in front of him, smiling up into his face, was the
handsome, mischievous countenance of Lob Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I see’d ’ee, Mister!” burst out the boy breathlessly.
“I see’d ’ee long afore ’ee could see I! Say now, Mister,
have ’ee any cigarette-pictures on ’ee?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf surveyed the excited child thoughtfully. Surely
the gods were on his side this day!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I haven’t, I soon <span class='it'>will</span> have,” he brought out with
a nervous smile, searching hurriedly in his pockets.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It appeared that he did have a couple of half-used
packages, containing the desired little bits of stiff, shiny
paper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There, there’s two, at any rate!” he said, handing
them over.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lob Torp scrutinized the two cards with a disappointed
eye. “They ain’t Three Castles,” he said sadly.
“Them others bain’t as pretty as they Three Castles be.”
He meditated for a moment, with his hands in his pockets.
“Say, Mister,” he began eagerly, with radiant eyes.
“Tell ’ee what I’ll do for ’ee. I’ll sell ’ee the photo of
Sis what I be taking down to Bob Weevil’s. He were
a-going to gie I summat for’n, but like enough it’ll be
worth more to a gent like yourself. Come now, mister,
gie I a sixpence and I’ll gie ’ee the picture and say
nought to Bob.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The ingratiating smile with which Lob uttered these
words would have been worthy of an Algerian street-arab.
Wolf made a humorous grimace at him, under
the mask of which he hid annoyance, uneasiness, curiosity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The boy continued: “ ’Tis a wonderful pretty picture,
Mister. I tooked it me own self. She be ridin’ astride
one of them wold tombstones in Dad’s yard, just the
same as ’twere a girt ’oss.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t mind looking at it,” said Wolf, after a pause,
pulling the boy into the door of a shop. But Lob Torp
was evidently an adept in the ways of infatuated gentlemen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Threepence for a look, Mister, and sixpence for to
keep,” he said resolutely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was on the tip of Wolf’s tongue to cry, “Hand it
over, boy. I’ll keep it!” But an instinct of suspicious
dignity restrained him, and he assumed a non-committal,
negligent air. But under this air the ancient, sly cunning
of the predatory demon began to fumble at the
springs of his intention. “I’ll get Bob Weevil to show
it to me,” the Machiavellian monitor whispered. “I shall
have it in my hands then without being indebted to this
rascally little blackmailer!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned to the boy and took him by the arm. “Come
on, youngster!” he said. “Never mind about the picture.
Much better give it to your friend! I’m going to Weevil’s
shop now myself, and you can show me the way. I’ll
give you your sixpence for <span class='it'>that</span>!” He pulled the child
forward with him and made him walk by his side, his
arm thrown lightly and casually round Lobbie’s neck.
But all this sagacious hypocrisy no more deceived the
cynical intelligence of Gerda’s brother than did the
unction of that arm about his shoulder!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The child slipped out of his grasp like a little eel.
“Don’t ’ee hold on to I, Mister. I ain’t going to rin nowhere.
I ain’t a-gived school the go-by for to play marbles.
I be goin’ fishing with Bob Weevil, present. He lets
I hold his net for’n.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, is there any fishing about here?” enquired Wolf
blandly, accepting his defeat. The boy skipped a pace
or two like a young rabbit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tain’t what <span class='it'>you’d</span> call fishing, Mister. Nought but
minnies and stickles, ’cept when us do go to Willum s
Mill. Woops-I! But them girt chub be hard to hook.
And Mister Manley he likes to keep <span class='it'>them</span> for the gentry.
’Tis when us be down to Willum’s of an evening, when
farmer be feeding ’isself, that Bob and me do a bit of
real fishing.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf surveyed the good-looking urchin with benevolent
irony. “Have you ever landed any of those big
chub?” he asked. And then he suddenly became conscious
that the nervous, hunted eye of a very shabby
clergyman was observing them both, with startled interest,
from the edge of the pavement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We’re near where us wants to go now, Sir,” was the
boy’s irrelevant response, uttered in a surprisingly loud
voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they had advanced a little further, the child
turned round to his companion and whispered furtively.
“Yon Parson were the Reverend T. E. Valley, Mister,
from King’s Barton. ’Ee do talk to I sometimes about
helping he with them holy services up to church; but
Dad he says all them things be gammon. He’s what you
might call blasphemious, my Dad is; and I be blasphemious,
too, I reckon; though Bob says that High Church
be a religion what lets a person play cricket on Sundays.
But I takes no stock o’ that, being as cricket and
such-like ain’t nought to I.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tilly-Valley! Tilly-Valley!” muttered Wolf under
his breath, recalling the contemptuous allusion of Mr.
Urquhart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Here we be, Mister!” cried Lobbie Torp, pausing
before a capacious old-fashioned shop, over which was
written in dignified lettering, “Robert Weevil and Son.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They entered together, and the boy was at once greeted
by a young man behind the counter, a young man with
black hair and a pasty complexion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hullo, Lob! Come to see if there’s fishing tonight?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf advanced in as easy and natural a manner as
he could assume. “I must propitiate my rival,” he said
grimly to himself. “My name is Solent, Mr. Weevil,”
he said aloud, “and I come on behalf of Mr. Urquhart
of King’s Barton.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, Sir, quite so, Sir; and what can I do for you,
Sir?” said the young man politely, bowing with a professional
smirk over the polished counter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The gentleman’s been to see Dad,” put in Lobbie, in
his high treble. “And he saw Sis, too, and Sis seed
him, too; and I rinned after him and showed him the
way!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And what can I do for you, Sir, or for Mr. Urquhart,
Sir?” repeated the young grocer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To tell you the truth, Mr. Weevil, it was Monk, the
man up there, who asked me to come to you. It appears
he’s run out of sausages—your especial sausages—and
he begged me to take back a pound or two for him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll do them up at once for you,” said the grocer
benignantly. “I’ve just had a new lot in.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was not very surprising to Wolf to notice that his
young guide hurriedly followed Mr. Weevil into the
recesses of the shop. From where he stood he could see
the two of them quite clearly through an open door, the
dark head and the fair head close together, poring over
some object that certainly was not sausages!</p>

<p class='pindent'>A shameless and scandalous curiosity seized him to
share in that colloquy. The various paraphernalia of the
shop, the piled-up tins of Reading Biscuits, the great
copper canisters of Indian teas, the noble erections of
Blacksod cheeses—all melted—all grew vague and indistinct.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mounted astride of a girt tombstone,” he repeated
to himself; and the thought of the cool whiteness of that
girl’s skin and its contact with that chiselled marble
reduced everything else in the world to a kind of irrelevance,
to something that fell into the category of the
tedious and the negligible.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There came at last an outburst of merriment from the
back of the shop that actually caused him to make a
few hurried steps in that direction; but he stopped short,
interdicted by his sense of personal dignity. “I really
can’t join in libidinous jesting with the Blacksod populace
<span class='it'>just</span> at present!” he thought to himself. “But there’s
plenty of time. I’ve no doubt <span class='it'>William</span> Solent would have
had no such hesitation!” And the thought came over him
how ridiculous these dignified withdrawings of his would
appear to that grinning skull in the cemetery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the youth and the boy came back again now
gravely enough to the front of the shop.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There you are, sir!” said Bob Weevil, handing him
a lusty package, and puffing out his cheeks as he did so.
“I think Mr. Urquhart will find those to his taste.” He
paused and gave Wolf’s companion a glance of complicated
significance. “Don’t tell Gerdie what I said
about that picture, Lob, will you?” he added.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a tone in this remark that caused Wolf’s
face to stiffen and his eyebrows to rise. “And now perhaps
you can tell me,” he said, “where I can find Malakite’s,
the book-shop?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two friends exchanged a puzzled and baffled
glance, not unmixed with disapproval. Books were evidently
something for which they both entertained a hostile
suspicion. But the young grocer gave him detailed
instructions, to which Lob Torp listened with satiric
condescension. “See you both again soon!” murmured
Wolf, with dignified amiability, as he left the shop.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He walked very slowly this time along the Blacksod
pavements, and he found himself buttoning his overcoat
tightly and turning up his collar; for the wind had
veered from northwest to due north, and the air that
blew against his face now had whistled across the sheep-tracks
of Salisbury Plain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ah! <span class='it'>There</span> was the second-hand book-shop, with the
single curious word, “Malakite,” written above it. He
paused for a second to gaze in at the window, and was
both surprised and delighted by the number and rarity
of the works exposed there for sale. The house itself
was a solidly constructed, sturdily built Mid-Victorian
erection, with a grey slate roof; and there was a little
open passage at one side of it, leading, he could see, into
a small walled-in garden at the back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He pushed open the door and entered the shop. At
first he found it difficult to see clearly; for it was already
nearly four o’clock, the sky heavily overcast, the
place ill-lighted, the gas-jets unlit. But after a moment
of suspense, he made out a tall, gaunt, bearded, old man,
with sunken cheeks, hollow eye-sockets, closely cropped
grizzled hair, seated in a corner of the shop upon a
rough, faded horse-hair chair, with a little round table
in front of him, carefully gumming together the loose
leaves of a large folio which he held upon his knee. The
old man’s head was bent low over his work, and he made
no sign of having heard anyone enter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Malakite?” said Wolf quietly, advancing towards
him between rows of books. His approach was so easy
and natural in that dim light, that his astonishment may
be imagined when the old man let the folio fall to the
ground, and stumbled to his feet with such agitated
violence that the round table collapsed also, tossing the
glue-pot upon the floor. In that twilit place it was almost
spectral to see the eyes in that old furrowed face staring
forth like black holes burnt in a wooden panel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I startled you, Sir,” muttered Wolf gently, drawing
back a little. “It’s a dark, cold afternoon. I’m afraid I
disturbed you. I am very sorry.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>For one second the old bookseller seemed to totter
and sway, as if to follow his folio to the ground; but
he mastered himself, and, leaning against the arm of
his horse-hair chair, spoke in a dry, collected voice. His
words were as unexpected to his visitor as his agitation
had been.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who <span class='it'>are</span> you, young man?” he said sternly. “Who
were your parents?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not Dante himself, when in the Inferno he heard a
similar question from that proud tomb, could have been
more startled than Wolf was at this extraordinary enquiry.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My name is Wolf Solent, Mr. Malakite,” he answered
humbly. “My father’s name was William Solent.
He was a master at Ramsgard School. My mother lives
in London. I am acting now as Secretary for Mr. Urquhart.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The old man, hearing these words, gave vent to a
curious rattling sigh, deep down in his throat, like the
sound of the wind through a patch of dead thistle-heads.
He made a feeble gesture with one of his long, bony
hands, half apologetic, half sorrowful, and sank back
again upon his chair.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You must forgive me, Sir,” he said after a pause.
“You must forgive me, Mr. Solent. The truth is, your
voice, coming suddenly upon me like that, reminded
me of things that ought to be—reminded me of—of too
many things.” The old man’s voice rose at the words
“too many,” but his next remark was quiet and natural.
“I knew your father quite well, sir. We were intimate
friends. His death was a great blow to me. Your father,
Mr. Solent, was a very remarkable man.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf, on hearing these words, moved up to the bookseller’s
side, and with an easy and spontaneous gesture
laid his hand upon the hand of the old man as it rested
upon the arm of his chair.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You are the second friend of my father’s that I have
met lately,” said he. “The other was Miss Selena Gault.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The old man hardly seemed to listen to these words.
He kept staring at him, out of his sunken eye-sockets,
with deprecatory intensity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf, beginning to feel a little uncomfortable, bent
down and occupied himself by picking up the fallen
table, the glue-pot, and the folio. As he did this he began
to grow aware of a sensation resembling that which he
had felt in Mr. Urquhart’s library—the sensation of the
presence of forms of human obliquity completely new
in his experience.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had no sooner got the folio safe back upon the
table, than the shop-door swung open behind him and
closed with a resounding noise. He glanced round; and
there, to his surprise, stood Darnley Otter. This quiet
gentleman brought in with him such an air of ease and
orderliness, that Wolf felt a wave of very agreeable reassurance
pass through his nerves. He was, in fact, thoroughly
relieved to see that yellow beard and gracious
reticence. The man’s reserved manner and courtly smile
gave him a comfortable sense of a return to those normal
and natural conventions from which he felt as if he
had departed very far since he left the tea-room of the
Lovelace Hotel yesterday.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two young men exchanged greetings, while the
owner of the book-shop observed them with a sort of
patient bewilderment. He then rose slowly to his feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s time for tea,” he said, in a carefully measured
voice. “I generally lock the place up now and go upstairs.
I don’t know——” He hesitated, looking from
one to the other. “I don’t know whether it would be asking
too much—if I asked you both to come upstairs with
me?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf and Mr. Otter simultaneously expressed their
extreme desire to drink a cup of tea with him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll go and warn my daughter, then,” he said eagerly.
“You know, Mr. Otter, I feel as if this young gentleman
and myself were already old friends. By the way, this
folio, Sir”—and he turned to Solent—“is the book I
wrote to Mr. Urquhart about. I think I shall have to
trust it with you. It’s a treasure. But Mr. Urquhart is a
good customer of mine. I don’t think he’ll want to purchase
it though. Its price is higher than he usually cares
to give. Will you excuse me, then, gentlemen?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So saying, he opened a door at the rear of the shop
and vanished from view. The two men looked at each
other with that particular look which normal people exchange
when an extraordinary person has suddenly left
them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A remarkable old chap,” observed Wolf quietly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley shrugged his shoulders and looked round the
shop.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You don’t think so?” pursued Solent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, he’s all right,” admitted the other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You don’t like him, then?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The only reply to this was an almost Gallic gesture,
implying avoidance of an unpleasant subject.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, what’s wrong?” said Solent, pressing him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, well,” responded the Latin-teacher, driven to
make himself more explicit. “There’s a rather sinister
legend attached to Mr. Malakite, in regard to his wife.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“His wife?” echoed Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He is said to have killed her with shame.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shame? Do people die of shame?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They have been known to do so,” said the schoolmaster,
drily, “at least in classical times. You’ve probably
heard of Œdipus, Solent?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But Œdipus <span class='it'>didn’t</span> die. That was the whole point. The
gods carried him away.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, perhaps the gods will carry Mr. Malakite
away.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do you mean?” enquired Wolf, with great interest,
lowering his voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I daresay we make too much of these things.
But there was a quarrel between this man and his wife,
connected with his fondness for their daughter, this
young Christie’s elder sister .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. well .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
there was a child born, too.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And the wife died?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The wife died. The girl was packed off to Australia.
It seems she couldn’t bear the sight of her child, and
it was taken away from her. I can’t tell you whether
the case got as far as the law-courts, or whether it was
hushed up. Your friend Miss Gault knows all about it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was silent, meditating upon all this.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not a very pleasant background for the other daughter!”
he brought out at last.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, she’s a funny little thing,” said Darnley, smiling.
“She lives so completely in books, that I don’t think she
takes anything that happens in the real world very
seriously. She always seems to me, when I meet her, as
if she’d just come out of a deep trance and wanted to
return to it. She and I get on splendidly. Well, you’ll
see her in a minute, and can judge for yourself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was silent again. He was thinking of the friendship
between this old man and his father. He pondered
in his mind whether or not to reveal to Darnley the unexpected
agitation which his appearance had excited.
For some reason he felt reluctant to do this. He felt
vaguely that his new closeness to his cynical progenitor
committed him to a certain caution. He was on the edge
of all manner of dark entanglements. Well! He would
use what discernment he had; but at any rate he would
keep the whole problem to himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I went to Torp’s yard,” he remarked, anxious to
change the subject. “The fellow doesn’t seem to have
got very far with Redfern’s headstone.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley Otter lifted his heavy eyelids and fixed upon
him a sudden piercing look from his mackerel-blue eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did Urquhart talk to you about Redfern?” he asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Only to grumble at him for doing something about
the book that didn’t suit his ideas. Did <span class='it'>you</span> know him?
Did he die suddenly?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Otter, instead of replying, turned his back, put
his hands in his pockets, and began pacing up and down
the floor of the shop, which seemed to get darker and
darker around them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stopped suddenly and pulled at his trim beard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I cursed my wretched school-work to you yesterday,”
he said. “But when I think of the misery that human
beings cause one another in this world, I am thankful
that I can teach Latin, and let it all go. But I daresay
I exaggerate; I daresay I exaggerate.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At that moment the door at the back of the shop
opened, and the old bookseller, standing in the entrance,
called out to them in a calm, well-bred voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Will you come, gentlemen? Will you come?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They followed him in silence into a little unlit passage.
Preceding them with a slow, careful shuffle, he led
them up a flight of steps to a landing above, where there
were several closed doors and one open door. At this
open door he stood aside and beckoned them to enter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The room, when they found themselves within it, was
lighted by a pleasant, green-shaded lamp. There was a
warm fire burning in the grate, in front of which was a
dainty tea-table with an old-fashioned urn, a silver teapot,
some cups and saucers of Dresden china, and a
large plate of thin bread-and-butter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>From beside this table a fragile-looking girl who
might have been anything between twenty and twenty-five
rose to welcome them. Darnley Otter greeted this
young person in the manner of a benevolent uncle, and
while Wolf and she were shaking hands, retained her
left hand affectionately in his own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Solent had received, since he left King’s Barton, so
many disturbing impressions, that he was glad enough
to yield himself up now, in this peaceful room, to what
was really a vague, formless anodyne of almost Quakerish
serenity. What he felt was undoubtedly due to the
personality of Christie Malakite; but as he sank down
in an armchair by her side, the impression he received
of her appearance was confined to an awareness of
smoothly parted hair, of a quaint pointed chin, and
of a figure so slight and sexless that it resembled those
meagre, androgynous forms that can be seen sometimes
in early Italian pictures.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For several minutes Wolf permitted the conversation
to pass lightly and easily between Darnley and Christie,
while he occupied himself in enjoying his tea. He did
not, however, hesitate to cast every now and then surreptitious
glances at the extraordinary countenance of the old
man, who, at a little distance from the table, was reposing
in a kind of abstracted coma, his bony hands clasped
around one of his thin knees, and his eyes half-closed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then, all in a moment, Wolf found himself describing
his visit to the stone-cutter’s yard, and without the
least embarrassment enlarging upon the hypnotic charm
that had been cast upon him by the loveliness of Gerda.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It appeared, for some mysterious reason, that he could
talk more freely to these two people than he had ever
talked in his life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had come, little as he had yet seen of him, to have
a genuine regard for Darnley Otter, a regard that he
had reason to feel was quite as strongly reciprocated.
And in addition to this there seemed to be something
about the pale, indefinite profile of the girl by his side,
the patient slenderness of her neck, the cool detachment
of her whole attitude, that unloosed the flow of his
speech and threw around him an unforced consciousness
of being at one with himself and at one with the general
stream of life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley rallied him with a dry shamelessness about
his confessed infatuation for the stone-cutter’s daughter;
and Christie, turning every now and then an almost
elfish smile toward his voluble talk, actually offered, as
she filled his cup for the third or fourth time, to help
him in his adventure by inviting the young woman herself,
whom she said she knew perfectly well, to have
tea with him any afternoon he liked to name!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She <span class='it'>is</span> beautiful,” the girl repeated. “I love to watch
her. But I warn you, Mr. Solent, you’ll have many
rivals.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s worse than a flirt,” remarked Darnley, gravely.
“She’s got something in her that I have always fancied
Helen of Troy must have had—a sort of terrible passivity.
I know for a fact that she’s had three lovers already.
One of them was a young Oxonian who, they tell
me, was a terrific rake. Another, so they say, was your
predecessor, young Redfern. But none of them—forgive
me, Christie dear!—seems to have, as they say down
here, ‘got her into trouble.’ None of them seems to have
made the least impression upon her! I doubt if she possesses
what you call a heart. Certainly not a heart that
you, Solent”—he smiled one of his gentlest ironic smiles—“are
likely to break. So go ahead, my friend! We shall
watch the course of your ‘furtivos amores,’ as Catullus
would say, with the most cold-blooded interest. Shan’t
we, Christie?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The young girl turned upon Wolf her steady, unprovocative,
indulgent gaze. “Perhaps,” she said quietly,
after a moment in which Wolf felt as though his mind
had encountered her mind like two bodiless shadows in
a flowing river—“perhaps in this case it will be different.
Would you marry her if it were different?” These
words were added in a tone that had the sort of faint
aqueous mischief in it, such as a water-nymph might
have indulged in, contemplating the rather heavy earth-loves
of a pair of mortals.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, confound it, <span class='it'>that’s</span> going a little too fast, even
for me!” Wolf protested. And, in the silence that followed,
it seemed to him as if these two people, this
Darnley and this Christie, had managed between them,
in some sort of subtle conspiracy, to take off the delicious
edge of his furtive obsession.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Damn them!” he muttered to himself. “I was a fool
to talk about it. But there it is! None of their chatter
can make the sweetness of Gerda less entrancing.” But
even as he formulated this revolt with a half-humorous
irritation, he was aware that his mood <span class='it'>had</span> in some imperceptible
way changed. Under cover of the friendly
badinage that was going on between Darnley and Christie,
he once or twice encountered the silent observation of
the old bookseller, who had now lighted his pipe and
was watching them all with a cloudy intentness; and it
occurred to him that it was quite as much due to the
shock of what he had heard about the old man that this
change had come, as to anything that these two had said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But to the devil with them all!” he muttered to himself,
as he and Darnley rose to go. “I’ve never seen anything
as desirable as that girl’s body and I’m not going
to be teased into giving it up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Before he left the house, the old bookseller wrapped
the folio in paper and cardboard and placed it in his
hands, making, as he did so, an automatic reference to
his professional concern about its well-being. But the
expression in Mr. Malakite’s hollow eyes, as this transaction
took place, seemed to Wolf to have some quite
different significance—some significance in no way connected
with the History of the Evershot Family.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All the way back to King’s Barton, as the two men
walked side by side in friendly fragmentary speech, Wolf
kept making spasmodic attempts to adjust the folio and
the sausages so as to leave his right hand free for his
oak-stick. He rejected all offers of assistance from his
companion with a kind of obstinate pride, declaring that
he “liked” carrying parcels; but the physical difficulty
of these adjustments had the effect of diminishing his
response both to the influence of the night and to the
conversation of his friend.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was quite dark now; and the north wind, whistling
through the blackthorn-hedges, sighing through the tops
of the trees, whimpering in the telegraph-wires, had begun
to acquire that peculiar burden of impersonal sadness,
which seems to combine the natural sorrows of the
human generations with some strange planetary grief
whose character is unrevealed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The influence of this dirge-like wind did by degrees,
in spite of the numbness of his obstinate clutch upon his
packages, come to affect Wolf’s mind. He seemed to rush
backward on the wings of this wind, to the two human
heads—to the fleshless head of William Solent buried in
the earth and to the despairing head of that son of perdition
crouching at Waterloo Station.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He mentally compared, as he shouted his replies to his
companion’s remarks against the blustering gusts, the
sardonic aplomb of the skull under the clay with that
ghastly despair of the living, and he flung over the thornhedge
a savage comment upon the ways of God.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The trim beard of Darnley Otter might wag on .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
like a brave bowsprit “stemming nightly to the pole”
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but the keel of every human vessel had a leak .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
it was only a question of chance .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just pure chance
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. how far that leak would go .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. any wagging
beard .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. any brave chin might have to cry, at any
moment, “Hold, enough!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And suddenly, in the covering darkness, Wolf took
off his hat and stretched back his head, straining his
neck as far as it would go, so that without relaxing the
movement of walking, his up-turned face might become
horizontal. In this position he made a hideous grimace
into infinity—a grimace directed at the Governing
Power of the Universe. What he desired to express in this
grimace was an announcement that his own secret happiness
had not “squared” him.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind rushed upwards like a rocket among those
distant stars. He imagined himself standing on some incredible
promontory on the faintest star he could see.
Even from that vantage he wanted to repeat his defiance—not
“squared” yet, O crafty universe!—not “squared”
yet!</p>

<div><h1 id='chap05'>THE BLACKBIRD’S SONG</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>The destinies certainly did appear anxious to
“square” him; for when that evening, after dinner with
the Otters, he repaired to the Manor House with his
packages, Mr. Urquhart turned out to be so delighted
with the book, that he commissioned him to return to the
bookseller the very next morning and make the old man
a liberal offer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf awoke, therefore, on this day of Saturn, in that
vague delicious mood wherein the sense of happiness-to-come
seems, like a great melted pearl, to cover every
immediate object and person with a liquid glamour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He took his bath with unalloyed satisfaction between
the four bare walls, whereon certain dimly outlined
squares in the extended whiteness indicated the exile of
all art except that of the air, the sun, and the wind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He saw nothing of either of the brothers. Jason had not
yet appeared; and though there had been some vague
reference to his accompanying Darnley in his early start,
it was now clear that the younger Otter wished his morning
walk to be free of human intercourse.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was all agreeable enough to Wolf, who, like most
conspirators, had a furtive desire to be left to his own
devices; and he resolved, without putting his resolution
into any formal shape, that as soon as his business with
Malakite was settled, he would make his way to the stone-cutter’s
yard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>From his conversation at breakfast with Mrs. Otter,
he learnt that it was possible to reach the portion of the
town where the bookseller lived without following the
whole length of Chequers Street. This suited him well, as
he wished to time his appearance at the Torp ménage so
as to be certain of finding the girl at home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had discovered, laid carefully at the edge of his
plate, a letter from his mother, and another letter, with
a Ramsgard postmark, that he suspected to be from
Selena Gault. Both these epistles he hurriedly thrust into
his coat-pocket, afraid of any ill-omened side-tracking
of his plans for that auspicious day.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It lacked about an hour of noon, when, armed with
permission to bid as high as five pounds for the Evershot
chronicle, Wolf entered for the second time the establishment
of Mr. John Malakite.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The old man received him without the remotest trace of
the emotion of the preceding day. He agreed so quickly to
accept Mr. Urquhart’s offer, that Wolf felt a little
ashamed of his own skill as a business intermediary. But
he was glad to escape the tedium of haggling, and was
preparing to bid the bookseller farewell, when the man
asked in a blank and neutral voice, as if the proposal
were a mechanical form of politeness, “Will you come
upstairs with me, Mr. Solent, and have a glass of something?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Knowing that there was no immediate hurry, if he were
to time his visit to the Torps so as to catch them at their
midday meal, Wolf assented to this suggestion, and, as
on the former occasion, followed the man up the dark
stairway with unquestioning docility.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found Christie in a long blue apron, dusting the
little sitting-room. Wolf was touched by the grave awkwardness
with which she pulled this garment over her
head and flung it down before offering him her hand.
The dress she now appeared in was of a sombre brown,
and so tightly fitting that it not only enhanced her
slenderness, but also gave her an almost hieratic look.
With her smoothly parted hair and abstracted brown
eyes she resembled some withdrawn priestess of Artemis,
interrupted in some sacred rite.</p>

<p class='pindent'>No sooner was the guest seated, than Mr. Malakite
muttered some inarticulate apology and went down to his
shop.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl stood for a while in silence, looking down
upon her visitor, who returned her scrutiny without embarrassment.
A delicious sense of age-long intimacy and
ease flowed over him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, Mr. Solent,” she murmured, “I suppose you’re
not going to leave Blacksod without seeing Gerda?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I thought of waiting till their dinner-time,” he said,
“when I would be certain of finding her. Redfern’s headstone
can be dragged in again as an excuse.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie nodded gravely. “I wrote to her yesterday,”
she said, “after you went. If I’d known you were coming
in today I might have asked her to tea. But I daresay
she’ll come anyway. She often does pay me visits.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>While the girl uttered these words, Wolf became aware
for the first time of the extraordinary key in which her
voice was pitched. It was a key so faint and so unresonant
as to suggest some actual deficiency in her vocal cords.
As soon as he became conscious of this peculiarity, he
found his attention wandering from the meaning of her
speech and focussing itself upon her curious intonation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But she moved to the fireplace now and bent her back
over it, striking a little lump of coal with an extremely
large silver poker.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That girl must be sick of admiration,” observed
Wolf, “wouldn’t you think so? Her mother must have an
anxious time.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I expect her mother knows how well she can take
care of herself,” retorted Christie, glancing sideways at
him while she rested on the handle of the poker. A
couple of thin loose tresses of silky brown hair hung
down across her brow, her nose, her mouth, her chin,
giving the impression that she was peering out at him
through the drooping tendrils of some sort of wild
vegetation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her remark, as may well be imagined, was not received
with any great ardour by her guest.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What an expression!” he cried petulantly. “Take care
of herself! Why the devil <span class='it'>shouldn’t</span> she take care of herself?”
And it occurred to him to wonder how it was that
this sophisticated young lady had ever made friends
with the stone-cutter’s daughter. Christie’s manners were
so well-bred that it was difficult to associate her with a
family like the Torps.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl smiled as she replaced the silver poker by the
side of the hearth. “Gerda knows well enough that <span class='it'>I</span> don’t
worry about her,” she said. “Pardon me a minute,” she
added, slipping past him into an alcove that adjoined
the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf took advantage of her absence to move across to
a bookshelf which already had attracted his attention.
What first arrested his interest now was an edition of
Sir Thomas Browne’s “Hydriotaphia, or Urn-Burial.”
He took this book down from the shelf, and was
dreamily turning its pages, when the girl returned with
a glass of claret in her hand. Hurriedly replacing the
book in its place and raising the wine to his lips, he
could not resist commenting upon some other, more
abstruse volumes that her bookshelf contained.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I see you read Leibnitz, Miss Malakite,” he said.
“Don’t you find those ‘monads’ of his hard to understand?
You’ve got Hegel there, too, I notice. I’ve always
been rather attracted to <span class='it'>him</span>—though just why, I’d be
puzzled to tell you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He settled himself again in his wicker-chair, wine-glass
in hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re fond of philosophy?” he added, scowling
amiably at her. His thick eyebrows contracted as he did
this, and his eyes grew narrow and small.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She seated herself near him upon the sofa and
smoothed out her brown skirt thoughtfully with her
fingers. She was evidently anxious to answer this important
question with a becoming scrupulousness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>With this new gravity upon the features of its mistress,
it seemed to Wolf as if the little sitting-room itself
awoke from somnolence and asserted its individuality. He
observed the unadulterated mid-century style of its cut-glass
chandeliers, of its antimacassars, of its rosewood
chairs, of its Geneva clock, and of the heavy gold frames
of its water-colour pictures. The room, as the morning
light fell upon these things across the grey slate roofs
and the yellow pansies in the window-box, certainly did
possess a charming character of its own, a character to
which the thick, dusky carpet and the great mahogany
curtain-rod across the window gave the final touches.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t understand half of what I read,” Christie began,
speaking with extreme precision. “All I know is
that every one of those old books has its own atmosphere
for me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Atmosphere?” questioned Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I suppose it’s funny to talk in such a way,” she went
on, “but all these queer non-human abstractions, like
Spinoza’s ‘substance’ and Leibnitz’s ‘monads’ and Hegel’s
‘idea,’ don’t stay hard and logical to me. They seem to
melt.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She stopped and looked at Wolf with a faint smile, as
if deprecating her extravagant pedantry.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do you mean—melt?” he murmured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I mean as I say,” she answered, with a shade of
querulousness, as if the physical utterance of words were
difficult to her and she expected her interlocutor to get
her meaning independently of them. “I mean they turn
into what I call ‘atmosphere.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The tone of thought,” he threw in, “that suits you
best, I suppose?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She looked at him as if she had been blowing soap-bubbles
and he had thrown his stick at one of them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m afraid I’m hopeless at expressing myself,” she
said. “I don’t think I regard philosophy in the light of
‘truth’ at all.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How do you regard it then?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie Malakite sighed. “There are so many of
them!” she murmured irrelevantly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So many?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So many truths. But don’t tease yourself trying to
follow my awkward ways of putting things, Mr. Solent.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m following you with the greatest interest,” said
Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What I mean to say <span class='it'>is</span>,” she went on, with a little
gasp, flinging out the words almost fiercely, “I regard
each philosophy, not as the ‘truth,’ but just as a particular
country, in which I can go about—countries with
their own peculiar light, their Gothic buildings, their
pointed roofs, their avenues of trees—— But I’m afraid
I’m tiring you with all this!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go on, for heaven’s sake!” he pleaded. “It’s just what
I want to hear.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I mean that it’s like the way you feel about things,”
she explained, “when you hear the rain outside, while
you’re reading a book. You know what I mean? Oh, I
can’t put it into words! When you get a sudden feeling of
life going on outside .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. far away from where you
sit .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. over wide tracts of country .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. as if you were
driving in a carriage and all the things you passed were .&nbsp;. life
itself .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. parapets of bridges, with dead
leaves blowing over them .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. trees at crossroads .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
park-railings .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. lamp-lights on ponds.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I don’t
mean, of course,” she went on, “that philosophy is the
same as life .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but—— Oh! Can’t you <span class='it'>see</span> what I
mean?” She broke off with an angry gesture of impatience.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf bit his lip to suppress a smile. At that moment he
could have hugged the nervous little figure before him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know perfectly well what you mean,” he said
eagerly. “Philosophy to you, and to me, too, isn’t science
at all! It’s life winnowed and heightened. It’s the essence
of life caught on the wing. It’s life <span class='it'>framed</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. framed
in room-windows .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in carriage-windows .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in mirrors
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in our ‘brown-studies,’ when we look up from
absorbing books .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in waking-dreams—— I do know
perfectly well what you mean!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie drew up her feet beneath her on the sofa and
turned her head, so that all he could see of her face was
its delicate profile, a profile which, in that particular
position, reminded him of a portrait of the philosopher
Descartes!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He changed the conversation back to himself. “It’s
queer,” he remarked, “that I can confide in you so completely
about Gerda.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why?” she threw out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t you see that what I’m admitting is an unscrupulous
desire to make love to your young friend?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh!” She uttered this exclamation in a faint, meditative
sigh, like a wistful little wind sinking down among
feathery reeds. “You mean that you might make her unhappy?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He gave a deprecatory shake of the head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But you leave out so many things in all this,” she
went on. “You leave out the character of Gerda; and you
leave out your own character, which, for all I know”—she
spoke in a tone whose irony was barely perceptible—“may
be so interesting that the advantage of contact with
it might even counterbalance—your lack of scruple!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf withdrew his hands, which were clasped so close
to Christie’s elbows as almost to touch them. He interlocked
his fingers now, round the back of his head, tilting
his chair a little. “Forgive me, Miss Malakite,” he
said ruefully. “I do blunder into unpardonable lapses
sometimes. I oughtn’t to have said <span class='it'>that</span> to you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so
bluntly. It’s because I seem to have .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a sort of .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
curiosity. At least I <span class='it'>think</span> it’s curiosity!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all right. Don’t you mind!” She spoke these words
with a tenderness that was as gentle as a caress—a caress
which might have been given to a disgraced animal that
required reassuring; and as she spoke she leaned forward
and made a little movement of her hand towards
him. It was the faintest of gestures. Her fingers immediately
afterwards lay clasped on her lap. But he did not
miss the movement, and it pleased him well. Another
thing he did not miss was that under any stress of emotion
a certain wavering shapelessness in her countenance
disappeared. Mouth, nose, cheeks, chin, all these features,
chaotic and inchoate when left to themselves, at such moments
attained a harmony of expression which approached,
if it did not actually reach, the verge of the
beautiful.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf brought down his tilted chair upon the floor with
a jerk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m forgiven then?” he said, and paused for a second,
searching gravely in her brown eyes for a clue to her
secret thoughts. “It must be all those books you read,”
he went on, “that makes you take my scandalous confessions
so calmly.” He stopped once more. “I suppose,” he
flung out, “the most amazing perversities wouldn’t shock
you in the least!” As soon as he had uttered these words
he remembered what Darnley had told him, and he caught
his breath in dismay. But Christie Malakite gave no sign
of being distressed. She even smiled faintly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t know,” she said, “that it’s my readings that
have made me what I am. In a sense I <span class='it'>am</span> conventional.
You’re wrong there. But in another sense I am .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what
you might call .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>outside the pale</span>.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you mean .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. inhuman?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She turned this over gravely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I certainly don’t like it when things get too human,”
she said. “That’s probably why I can’t <span class='it'>bear</span> the Bible. I
like to be able to escape into parts of Nature that are
lovely and cool, untouched and free.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf nodded sympathetically; but he got up now to
take his leave, and allowed these words of hers to float
away unanswered. He allowed them, as he moved to the
door, to sink down among the old-fashioned furniture
about her, as if they were a chilly, moonlight dew
mingling with warm, dusty sun-motes. His final impression
was that the ancient objects in her room were pondering
mutely and disapprovingly upon this fragile heathen
challenge to the anthropomorphism of the Scriptures!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once out in the street—and strangely enough before his
mind reverted to Gerda at all—Wolf found himself recalling
something he had hardly noticed at the time, but
which now assumed a curious importance. Between the
pages of the volume of the “Urn-Burial” which he had
taken down from Christie’s shelf, there had lain a grey
feather. “Her marker, I suppose!” he said to himself,
as he made his way back to the High Street.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But soon enough, now, in the hard metallic sunshine
and the sharp wind, his obsession for the stone-cutter’s
daughter rose up again and dominated his consciousness.
With rapid strides he made his way through the chief
thoroughfares of the town, witnessing on every side all
manner of bustling lively preparations for the Saturday
afternoon’s marketing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he was within a few hundred yards of the Torp
yard, he glanced at his watch and realized that he was
still a good deal too early. It would be, he felt, a great
blunder to present himself at that house, and find no
Gerda! Looking around for a resting-place, he espied a
small patch of grass behind some ricketty palings, in the
centre of which was a stone water-trough. He clambered
through the palings and sat down on the ground, with his
back to this object. It was then, as he lit a cigarette, that
he remembered that he had not yet read his letters.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He opened them one by one. They were both short.
Miss Gault’s ran as follows—</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='noindent'><span class='sc'>My dear boy</span>:</p>

<p class='pindent'>If I were not so eccentric a person and <span class='it'>striking</span>, I may say, in
more senses than one, I should take for granted that you had
forgotten all about me—but since I know that both my manners
and my cats <span class='it'>must</span> have made <span class='it'>some</span> impression upon you, I am
not at all afraid of this! I am writing to ask you whether
you will care to come over to tea with me on Sunday afternoon?
I will not reveal in advance whether there will be only
myself and my cats .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:left;margin-left:9em;'>Yrs. affectionately,</p>
<p class='line' style='text-align:left;margin-left:13em;'><span class='sc'>Selena Gault</span>.</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Solent’s letter was even more laconic.</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='noindent'><span class='sc'>My dearest Wolf</span>:</p>

<p class='pindent'>Carter has begun to fuss about the rent. What does he think we
are? And why did you run up that bill at Walpole’s? That’s the
one kind of luxury which ought always to be paid for in cash.
I have refused to pay till the Summer. Better let it be understood
that you’re away on a holiday! I think I shall join you at
King’s Barton quite soon; in fact, as soon as you can assure me
that you’ve discovered a clean, small cottage, with a neat, small
garden. I think it will do me good to do a little gardening. How
lovely, my dear, it will be to see you again!</p>

<p class='line' style='text-align:left;margin-left:9em;'>Your loving mother,</p>
<p class='line' style='text-align:left;margin-left:9em;'><span class='sc'>Ann Haggard Solent</span>.</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf pushed out his under-lip and drew down the
corners of his mouth, as he replaced these two documents
in his pocket. Then he got up upon his feet and shivered.
He looked at his watch again. “I’ll go in,” he said to
himself, “when it’s five minutes to one.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He pulled his greatcoat tighter around him, and, removing
his cloth-cap, sat down upon it very gravely, as
if it had been a wishing-carpet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The passers-by upon the pavement hardly turned to
notice the bareheaded man with an oak-stick across his
knees. They were Blacksod burgesses and had their own
affairs to attend to. A tuft of vividly green grass grew
between some uneven bricks in front of him; and he regarded
its sturdy, transparent blades with concentrated
interest.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Grass and clay!” he thought to himself. “From clay
to grass and then from grass to clay!” And once more
that peculiar kind of shivering ran through him, which a
coincidence of physical cold with amorous excitement is
apt to produce, especially when some fatal step of unknown
consequence is trembling in suspension.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And with extraordinary clearness he realized that particular
moment in the passing of time, as he sat there,
a hunched-up gaunt figure, wrapped in a faded brown
overcoat, waiting with a beating heart his entrance to
the yard of Mr. Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind, after his fashion, conjured up in geographical
simultaneousness all the scenes around him. He saw
the long, low ridge of upland, on the east slope of which
lay the village of King’s Barton, and along the top of
which ran the highroad linking together the scholastic
retreats of Ramsgard with the shops and tanneries of
Blacksod. He saw the rich, pastoral Dorsetshire valley on
his right. He saw the willows and the reeds of the Somerset
salt-marshes away there on his left. And it came into
his mind how strange it was that while he at this moment
was shivering with amorous expectation at the idea of
entering that yard of half-made tombstones, far off in the
Blackmore Vale many old ploughmen, weather-stained
as the gates they were even now leisurely setting open,
were moving their horses from one furrowed field to another
after their midday’s rest and meal. And probably
almost all of them had relations who would come to Mr.
Torp’s yard on their behalf one day.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll go to Miss Gault on Sunday,” he said to himself,
“and I’ll look around for a place for mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Swinging his mind from these resolutions with an
abrupt turn, emphasized by a dagger-like thrust into the
earth with the end of his stick, he now struggled to his
feet, and without glancing again at his watch, clambered
over the palings and strode down the road.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The appearance of Torp’s yard seemed to have changed
in the night. It looked smaller, less imposing. The headstones
themselves looked second-rate; but Wolf, as he
made for the door, wondered which of them it was that
had served the girl for a hobby-horse, and this doubt once
more lent them dignity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He knocked boldly at the door; but he had time, while
the vibrations of the sound were dying down, to notice
that there was a crack in one of the door-panels, and in
the middle of this crack a tiny globule of dirty paint.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The door was opened by Mrs. Torp. There they all
were, just beginning their meal! Gerda was evidently
disposing of no small helping of Yorkshire pudding. But
she swallowed her mouthful at one gallant gulp and regarded
her admirer with a smile of pleasure.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The first words uttered by Wolf, when Mrs. Torp had
shut the door behind him, were directed at the head of
the family, whose mouth and eyes were simultaneously
so wide open as to suggest sheer panic.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I haven’t come about business today. I only happened
to be passing and I thought I’d look in. Mr. Urquhart
was very pleased to hear how well you’re getting on
with that monument. I saw him last night.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Torp turned his countenance toward his wife, a
proceeding which seemed to announce to everyone round
the table that he was too cautious even to commit himself
to a word, until reassured as to what was expected of
him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Just passing, and thought to look in,” repeated Mrs.
Torp, avoiding her husband’s appeal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We seed three girt woppers down to Willum’s Mill.
We dursn’t pull ’em out, cos Mr. Manley his own self
were casting. He were fishing proper, he were. But Bob
says maybe Mr. Manley won’t be at the job, come Monday.
So then us’ll try again.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>These hurried words from young Lob eased the atmosphere
a little.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Torp looked at the sirloin in front of her husband
and at the Yorkshire pudding in front of herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Thought to look in,” she repeated, resuming her
seat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf began to feel something of a fool. He also began
to feel extremely hungry. He laid his hand on the shoulder
of the boy, and was on the point of saying something
about perch and chub, to cover his embarrassment, when
he detected a quick interchange of glances between mother
and daughter, followed by the appearance of a faint flush
on the girl’s cheeks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Since you <span class='it'>were</span> passing, you’d be best to sit ’ee down
and take a bit of summat,” said the woman reluctantly.
“Father, cut the young gentleman a slice. Get a plate
from the dresser, Lob.” Thus speaking, she thrust a chair
beneath the table, with more violence than was necessary,
and having added a very moderate portion of Yorkshire
pudding to the immense slice of beef carved by the
monument-maker, she caught up her own empty plate
and retired into the scullery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When once his guest was seated at the table, between
the silent Gerda and himself, the obese stone-cutter relaxed
into most free pleasantry.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Injoy theeself like the wheel at the cistern, be my text,
Mr. Redfern, I beg pardon, Mr. Solent. The Lord gives
beef, but us must go to the Devil for sauce, as my granddad
used to murmur. I warrant this meat were well fed
and well killed, as you might say. ’Tain’t always so wi’
they Darset farmers.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf listened in silence to these and other similar remarks
while he ate his meal. He was so close to Gerda
that he could catch the faint susurration of her deep, even
breathing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m glad she doesn’t speak,” he thought to himself,
in that sensualized level of consciousness which is just
below the threshold of mental words; “for unless I could
talk to her alone——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And so thik beast went to the hammer.” The thread of
Mr. Torp’s carnivorous discourse had begun to pass
Wolf by, when the foregoing sentence fell like a veritable
pole-axe upon his ear. Like a flash he recalled
Selena Gault’s words outside the slaughter-house. “Damn
it!” he said to himself. “The woman’s right.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Be there any apple-tart, Mammie?” cried Lob, in a
shrill voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The door of the scullery was opened about three inches,
in which space the beckoning forefinger of Joan Torp
summoned her son to her side.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Very slowly the beautiful profile on Wolf’s right turned
towards her father.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tisn’t no use your coaxing of I, Missie,” responded
the stone-cutter. “What yer Mummie says, yer Mummie
says. I reckon she’s just got enough o’ that there pasty to
comfort Lob. Us and Mr. Redfern must swetten our bellies
by talking sweet; and what’s more, my pet, if I don’t
get out in thik yard afore I gets to sleep, there’ll be no
pleasing Squire <span class='it'>or</span> Mr. Manley!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Saying this, the man rose from his chair, glanced at
Wolf with a leer like the famous uncle of Cressid, and
shuffled out of the house, closing the door behind him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf and Gerda were left alone, seated side by side in
uncomfortable silence. He moved his chair back a little
and glanced toward the scullery-door. The voice of the
woman and her son reached him in an obscure murmur.
His eye caught the devastated piece of meat at the end
of the table and it brought to his mind the terrifying
story of how the flesh of the Oxen of the Sun uttered
articulate murmurs as the companions of Odysseus
roasted it at their impious camp-fire.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I <span class='it'>must</span> say something,” he thought. “This silence is
beginning to grow comic.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He began to search his pockets for cigarettes. It seemed
absurd to ask leave of this young girl, and yet it was
likely enough that her shrewish mother detested tobacco.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You don’t mind if I smoke?” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda smilingly shook her head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I suppose you’ve often been told that you’re as lovely
as the girl who was the cause of the Trojan War?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What a way of breaking the ice!” he thought to himself,
and felt a pang of mental humiliation. “If the wench
is going to dull my wits to this extent, I’ll miss my chance
and be just where I was yesterday.” Under cover of what
Darnley had called the girl’s terrible passivity, which
was indeed just then like the quiescence of a great unpicked
white phlox in a sun-warmed garden, he lit his
cigarette and ransacked his brain for a line of action.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Desperately he hit upon the most obvious one. “Have
you got anything to put on within reach?” he whispered
rapidly. “I want to see something more of you. Let’s step
out while we’ve got the chance and go for a stroll somewhere!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl remained for a moment in motionless indecision,
listening intently to the murmuring voices in the
scullery. Then, with a grave nod, she rose to her feet and
stepped lightly to a curtained recess, behind which she
vanished. Returning in less than a minute she presented
herself in hat and cloak.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf, trembling with a nervous excitement that made
his stomach feel sick, seized his own coat and stick and
moved boldly to the door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on!” he whispered. “Come on!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They slipped out together and the girl closed the door
behind them with cautious celerity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The stone-cutter’s chisel could be heard in his open
shed; but his back must have been turned to them, and
they did not cast a glance in his direction. Into the street
they passed, Wolf taking care not to let the latch of the
gate click. Instinctively he led his captive to the right,
away from the town. They walked rapidly side by side,
and Wolf noted with surprise the absence of finery in the
things worn by his silent companion. The hat was of
cream-coloured felt surrounded by a blue band; the cloak
of some soft plain stuff, also cream-coloured. Wolf kept
walking a good deal faster than circumstances seemed to
demand, but he repeatedly fancied he heard the light
steps of the intrusive Lob running in pursuit of them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Before long they reached a place where a broad road
branched to the left at the foot of a considerable hill.
Wolf had not remembered passing this turn on the preceding
day; but his attention must have been occupied
with the row of little villas on the other side.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Following his instinct again, he turned up this road
and slackened his pace. Still his companion remained
perfectly silent; but she appeared quite untroubled by
the rapidity of their movement, and she swung along by
his side lightly and easily, every now and then brushing
the budding hedge on her right with her bare hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For about half a mile they advanced up the long,
steady hill, meeting no one and seeing nothing but
snatches of sloping meadow-land as they passed various
five-barred gates.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then there came a turn to the left, and all of a sudden,
over a well-worn wooden stile, the top bar of which was
shiny as a piece of old furniture, they found themselves
overlooking the whole town of Blacksod, and, away beyond
that, the pollard-bordered course of the sluggish
Lunt, as it crossed the invisible border-line between
Dorset and Somerset.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do you call this hill, Missie?” he murmured, as
he recovered his breath. It seemed impertinent to use
her Christian name quite so quickly; but no stretch of
politeness could have induced him just then to utter the
syllable Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Babylon Hill,” she replied quite naturally and easily;
for she was less out of breath than he.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Babylon? What an extraordinary name!” he cried.
“Why Babylon?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But at that she shrugged her young shoulders and contemplated
the blue distances of Somersetshire. To her
mind the extraordinary thing evidently was that anyone
could be surprised that Babylon Hill was called Babylon
Hill!</p>

<p class='pindent'>From the stile over which they were leaning a little
field-path ran along the sloping greensward and lost
itself in a small hazel-copse that overshadowed one end
of a rounded table-land of turf-covered earthworks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on,” he cried. “Skip over, child; and let’s see
where <span class='it'>that</span> leads!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She swung herself across without any assistance, and
Wolf noticed that in the open country the movements of
her body were entirely free from languor or voluptuousness.
They became the swift, unconscious movements
of a very healthy young animal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Has <span class='it'>this</span> got any name?” he remarked, as they
clambered up the turfy slope of the grassy rampart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Poll’s Camp,” she answered. And then, after a pause,</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>“When Poll his rain-cap has got on</p>
<p class='line0'>They’ll get their drink at Dunderton!”</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>She repeated this in the peculiar sing-song drawl of a
children’s game.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was something in her intonation that struck Wolf
as queerly touching. It didn’t harmonize with her ladylike
attire. It suggested the simple finery of a thousand
West Country fairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Poll-Poll-Poll,” he repeated. And there came over
him a deep wonder about the origin of this laborious
piece of human toil. Were they Celts or Romans who
actually, with their blunt primitive spades, had changed
the face of this hill? Was this silent beautiful girl beside
him the descendant of some Ionian soldier who had
come in the train of the legionaries?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Dallying with these thoughts—which probably would
never have come into his head at all, if a certain childishness
in the girl hadn’t, in a very subtle manner, lessened
the bite of his lust—Wolf was slower than she in
reaching the top of the ridge. When he did reach the top,
and looked down into the rounded hollow below, he was
astonished to see no sign of his companion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good Lord!” he thought, “has she gone round to the
right or to the left?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He ran down into the bottom of the little artificial
valley and stood hesitating.</p>

<p class='pindent'>How like a child, to play him a trick of this kind!</p>

<p class='pindent'>His thoughts shaped themselves quickly now. His hope
of finding her depended on how far he could sound her
basic instincts. If she were of a hare-like nature she would
double on her tracks, which in this case would mean turning
to the left or right; if she were of the feline tribe she
would pursue her course, which in this case would mean
climbing the opposing earthwork. Wolf turned to the
right and followed the narrow green hollow as it wound
round the hill.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ah, there she was!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda lay supine, her arms outstretched, her cream-coloured
hat clutched tight in one of her hands, her
knees bare.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She waited till Wolf was so close that he could see
that her eyes were shut. Then, catching the vibration of
his tread upon the turf, she leapt to her feet and was off
again, running like Atalanta, and soon vanishing from
sight. Wolf pursued her; but he thought to himself, “I
won’t run <span class='it'>quite</span> as fast as I could! She’ll better enjoy
being caught if she has had a good race.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As a matter of fact, so swift-footed was the damsel
that by following this method of leisurely pursuit he soon
lost her altogether. The hollow trench ran straight into
the heart of a thick coppice which from this point outwards
had overgrown the whole of the camp. Here, in
the heavy undergrowth, composed of brambles, elder-bushes,
dead bracken, stunted sycamores, and newly-budded
hazels, all ordinary paths disappeared completely.
All he could have done was to have followed
obstinately the bottom of the trench; and that was so
overgrown that it was unbelievable she should have
forced a way there. But if he didn’t follow the trench,
where the devil should he go? Where, under the sky,
had <span class='it'>she</span> gone? “The earth hath bubbles as the water
hath,” he quoted to himself, amused, irritated, and completely
nonplussed. Teased into doing what he knew
was the last thing calculated to bring her back, he began
calling her name; at first gently and hesitatingly;
at last loudly and indignantly. The girl, no doubt panting
like a hunted fawn somewhere quite close to him,
must have been especially delighted by this issue to the
affair; for one of the peculiarities of Poll’s Camp was
the presence of an echo; and now, over and over again,
this echo taunted him. “Ger-da—Ger-da!” it flung across
the valley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He would have been more philosophical at this juncture
if he hadn’t, at that brief moment of overtaking her,
caught sight of those incredibly white knees. But the impatience
in his senses was at least mitigated by his appreciation
of the immemorial quality of his pursuit! He
looked round helplessly and whimsically at the thick
undergrowth and sturdy hazel-twigs; and he played with
the fancy that, like another Daphne or Syrinx, his maid
might have undergone some miraculous vegetable transformation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ger—da! Ger—da!” The echo returned to him again;
whereupon once more, the image of those bare knees
destroyed the spirit of philosophical patience.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But he sat down then, with his back against a young
sycamore, and lit a cigarette, wrapping his overcoat
carefully round him and resolving to make the best of a
bad job.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If she <span class='it'>has</span> run away from me,” he thought, “and just
gone back to Chequers Street, there’s no doubt she’ll come
out with me again. She certainly seemed at ease with
me.” Thus spoke one voice within him. Another voice
said: “She thinks you’re the father of all fools. You’ll
never have the gall to ask her to go out with you again.”
And then as he extinguished his third cigarette against a
piece of chalk, moving aside the tiny green buds of an
infinitesimal spray of milkwort, he became aware that
a blackbird, in the dark twilight of hazel-stems, was
uttering notes of an extraordinary purity and poignance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He listened, fascinated. That particular intonation of
the blackbird’s note, more full of the spirits of air and of
water than any sound upon earth, had always possessed
a mysterious attraction for him. It seemed to hold, in the
sphere of sound, what amber-paved pools surrounded by
hart’s-tongue ferns contain in the sphere of substance.
It seemed to embrace in it all the sadness that it is possible
to experience without crossing the subtle line into
the region where sadness becomes misery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He listened, spellbound, forgetting hamadryads, Daphne’s
pearl-white knees and everything.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The delicious notes hovered through the wood—hovered
over the scented turf where he lay—and went wavering
down the hollow valley. It was like the voice of the
very spirit of Poll’s Camp, unseduced by Roman or by
Saxon, pouring forth to a sky whose peculiar tint of indescribable
greyness exactly suited the essence of its
identity, the happiness of that sorrow which knows
nothing of misery. Wolf sat entranced, just giving himself
up to listen; forgetting all else. He was utterly unmusical;
and it may have been for that very reason that the quality
of certain sounds in the world melted the very core of his
soul. Certain sounds could do it; not very many. But the
blackbird’s note was one of them. And then it was that
without rising from the ground he straightened his back
against the sycamore-tree and got furiously red under his
rugged cheeks. Even his tow-coloured hair, protruding
from the front of his cap, seemed conscious of his
humiliation. Waves of electricity shivered through it;
while beads of perspiration ran down his forehead into
his scowling eyebrows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For he realized, in one rush of shame, that Gerda was
the blackbird!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He realized this before she made a sound other than
that long-sustained tremulous whistle. He realized it instantaneously
by a kind of sudden absolute knowledge,
like a slap in the face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then, immediately afterwards, she came forward,
quite calmly and coolly, pushing aside the hazels and the
elder-bushes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found her a different being, when she stood there
in front of him, smiling down upon him and removing
bits of moss and twigs from her hair. She had lost something
from the outermost sheath of her habitual reserve;
and like a plant that has unloosed its perianth she displayed
some inner petal of her personality that had, until
that moment, been quite concealed from him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>Gerda!</span>” he exclaimed reproachfully, too disordered
to assume any sagacious reticence; “how on earth did
you learn to whistle like that?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She continued placidly to clear the wood-rubble out
of her fair hair; and the only reply she vouchsafed to
his question was to toss down her cream-coloured hat at
his feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Very deliberately, when her hair was in order, she
proceeded to lift up the hem of her skirt and pick out
the burs from that. Then she quickly turned away from
him. “Brush my back, will you?” she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had to get up upon his feet at this; but he obeyed
her with all patience, carefully removing from the cream-coloured
jacket every vestige of her escapade.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There!” he said, when he had finished; and taking
her by the shoulders, he swung her around.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the very act of doing this he had determined to kiss
her; but something about the extraordinary loveliness of
her face, when she did confront him, deterred him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was a surprise to himself at the moment; but
later, analyzing it, he came to the conclusion that although
beauty, up to a certain point, is provocative of
lust, beyond a certain point it is destructive of lust; and
it is this, whether the possessor of such beauty be in a
chaste mood or not.</p>

<p class='pindent'>If only—so he thought to himself later—Gerda’s
face had been a little less flawless in its beauty, the
beauty of her body would have remained as maddening to
his senses as it was at the beginning. But the more he
had seen of her the more beautiful her face had grown;
until it had now reached that magical level of loveliness
which absorbs with a kind of absoluteness the whole
æsthetic sense, paralyzing the erotic sensibility.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Instead of kissing her he sat down again with his back
to the sycamore; while Gerda, lying on her stomach at
his feet, her chin propped upon the palms of her hands,
began to talk to him in unconscious, easy, almost boyish
freedom.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wouldn’t have run away,” she said, “so you
needn’t scold. I <span class='it'>would</span> have if it had been anyone else. I
always <span class='it'>do</span> run away. I hide first and then slip off.
Father’s quite tired of seeing me come back into the yard
after I’ve started for a walk with someone. That’s because
I always like people at the beginning, when they’re
frightened of me and don’t try to touch me. But when
they stop being frightened, and get familiar, I just hate
them. Can you understand what I mean, or can’t you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf surveyed the beautiful face in front of him and
recalled what Darnley had said about the three lovers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But, Gerda——” he began.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well?” she said, smiling. “Say it out! I know it’s
something bad.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You must have had <span class='it'>some</span> love-affairs, being the sort
of girl you are. You can’t make me believe you’ve always
run away.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She nodded her head vigorously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I have,” she said. “I have, always. Though the boys I
know never will believe it. Directly they touch me I run
away. I want them to want me. It’s a lovely feeling to be
wanted like that. It’s like floating on a wave. But when
they try any of their games, messing a person about and
rumpling a person’s clothes, I can’t bear it. I <span class='it'>won’t</span> bear
it, either!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf lifted his thick eyebrows and let them fall again,
wrinkling them so that a great puckered fold established
itself above his hooked nose. His ruddy face, under its
rough crop of coarse, bleached hair, resembled a red
sandstone cliff on the top of which a whitish-yellow
patch of withered grass bowed before the wind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl clambered to her feet, and, smoothing out her
skirt beneath her, sat down on the ground by his side,
hugging her knees.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I found out I could whistle like that,” she began
again, this time in a slow, meditative voice, “when I
used to play with Bob in the Lunt ditches, down Longmead.
I fooled him endless times doing different birds.
Listen to this. Do you know what this is?” And with her
mouth pursed up into the form of a crimson sea-anemone,
she imitated the cry of the female plover when any
strange foot, of man or beast, approaches her nest on the
ground.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wonderful!” cried Wolf, enraptured by that long-drawn
familiar scream borne away upon the wind. “How
<span class='it'>did</span> you learn to do it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I fooled Bob with that; but I fooled Dick—he was an
Oxford gentleman—with a silly owl’s-hooting which old
Bob would have known at once.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you let the Oxford gentleman make love to you,
Gerda?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As soon as he had uttered the words, he felt a sense
of shame that was like a pricking sore lodged under the
cell-lobes in the front of his brain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There—don’t answer!” he whispered hurriedly. “That
was a gross remark of mine.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the half-profile which she had turned upon him
showed no traces of anger.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I told you, didn’t I?” was all she said. “I ran away.
I hid. I hid in the hedge under Ramsbottom. Dick was
furious. He went past me several times. I heard him
damning me like a serjeant—Ramsbottom’s miles away.
We’d taken our lunch. He had to go home without me
and he told mother. Mother hit me with the broom when
I got back. Dick was an ‘honourable’; so Mother wanted
me to marry him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was reduced to silence. He watched the flutterings
of a greenfinch over some young elder-bush saplings.
Then he turned towards her and spoke with solemn emphasis.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wish you’d make that blackbird-noise for me now,
Gerda.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He detected from her expression that this was a crisis
between them. Her smile was suspended and hung like a
faltering wraith over every feature of her face. She
seemed to hesitate; and her hesitation brought a depth
into her eyes that darkened their colour so that they became
a deep violet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve never <span class='it'>once</span> whistled for anybody,” she said
slowly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf sent a wordless cry of appeal down into the
abysses of his consciousness. They were ready to help
him, those powers in the hidden levels of his being. They
responded to his cry and he knew that they responded.
In the repetition of his request there was a magnetic
tone of power that reassured himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on, Gerda!” he said. “That’s all the more reason.
Come on! Whistle that song!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Turning her face away from him, so that he could see
nothing of her mouth, she began at once.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He could hardly believe his ears. It was like a miracle.
It was as if she had swiftly summoned one of those
yellow-beaked birds out of its leafy retreat. It seemed
easier that a bird should be decoyed out of a wood than
that a human throat should utter actual unmistakable
bird-notes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go on! Go on!” cried Wolf, in an ecstasy of pleasure,
the moment there was any cessation of this stream of cool,
liquid, tremulous melody.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Over the turf-ramparts of Poll’s Camp it swelled and
sank, that wistful, immortal strain. Away down the grassy
slopes it floated forth upon the March wind. No conceivable
sky but one of that particular greyness could have
formed the right kind of roof for the utterance of this
sound. Wolf cared nothing that the whistler kept her
face turned aside as she whistled. He gave himself up so
completely to the voice, that the girl Gerda became no
more than a voice herself. At length it did really cease,
and silence seemed to fall down upon that place like
large grey feathers from some inaccessible height.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Both the man and the girl remained absolutely motionless
for a while.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then Gerda leapt to her feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s go down to Longmead and watch the water-rats
swim the Lunt!” she cried. “We can get down there from
here easily. There’s a lovely little field-path I know. And
we shan’t meet anyone; for Bob and Lobbie are going to
Willum’s Mill.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf rose stiffly. He had sat so long in petrified delight
that he was a little cramped. His mind felt drugged
and cramped too, and felicitously stupid.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wherever you like, Gerda dear,” he said, looking at
her with hypnotized admiration.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She took him by the hand, and together they climbed
the embankment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The wind was gentler now, and a very curious diffusion
of thin, watery, greenish light seemed to have melted
into the grey stretches of sky above their heads. The immense
Somersetshire plain, with patches of olive-green
marsh-land and patches of moss-green meadow-land, lost
itself in a pale, sad horizon, where, like a king’s sepulchre,
rose the hill-ruin of Glastonbury. The path by which
Gerda guided him down to the valley was indeed an ideal
one for two companions who desired no interruption.
Starting from a pheasants’ “drive” in the lower half of
the hazel-copse, it wound its way down the incline along
a series of grassy terraces dotted by patches of young
bracken-fronds that had only very recently sprouted up
among the great dead brown leaves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Arrived at the foot of the hill, they struck a narrow
cattle-drove where the deep winter-ditches were still full
of water and where huge half-fallen willow-trunks lay
across old lichen-covered palings.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Advancing up this lane hand in hand with his companion,
Wolf felt his soul invaded by that peculiar kind of
melancholy which emanates, at the end of a spring day,
from all the elements of earth and water. It is a sadness
unlike all others, and has perhaps some mysterious connection
with the swift, sudden recognition, by myriads and
myriads of growing things, of the strange fatality that
pursues all earthly life, whether clothed in flesh or
clothed in vegetable fibre. It is a sadness accentuated by
grey skies, grey water, and grey horizons; but it does
not seem to attain its most significant meaning until the
pressure of the Spring adds to these elemental wraiths
the intense wistfulness of young new life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It seemed to Wolf, as they plodded along side by side
through that muddy lane, that the light-green buds of
those aged willow-trunks were framed in a more appropriate
setting under that cold forlorn sky than any
sunshine could give to them. Later seasons would warm
them and cherish them. November rains would turn them
yellow and bring them down into the mud.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But no other sky would hang above them with the
cold floating weight of sadness as this one did—a weight
like a mass of grey seaweed beneath a silent sea. No
other sky would be cold enough and motionless enough to
actually <span class='it'>listen</span> to the rising of the green sap within them,
that infinitesimal flowing, flowing, flowing, that for non-human
ears must have made strange low gurglings and
susurrations all day long.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At last they came to the bank of the river Lunt.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hush!” whispered Gerda. “Don’t make a noise! It’s
so lovely when you can make a water-rat flop in and see
it swim across.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was along the edge of a small tributary full of
marsh-marigolds that they approached the river-bank.
Gerda was so impatient to hear a water-rat splash that
she scarcely glanced at these great yellow orbs rising
from thick, moist, mud-stained stalks and burnished
leaves; but to Wolf, as he passed them by, there came
rushing headlong out of that ditch, like an invisible
company of tossing-maned air-horses, a whole wild herd
of ancient memories! Indescribable! Indescribable! They
had to do with wild rain-drenched escapes beneath banks
of sombre clouds, of escapes along old backwaters and
by forsaken sea-estuaries, of escapes along wet, deserted
moor-paths and by sighing pond-reeds; along melancholy
quarry-pools and by quagmires of livid moss. Indescribable!
Indescribable! But memories of this kind were—and
he had long known it!—the very essence of his life.
They were more important to him than any outward
event. They were more sacred to him than any living
person. They were his friends, his gods, his secret religion.
Like a mad botanist, like a crazed butterfly-collector,
he hunted these filmy growths, these wild
wanderers, and stored them up in his mind. For what
purpose did he store them up? For <span class='it'>no</span> purpose! And
yet these things were connected in some mysterious way
with that mythopœic fatality which drove him on and
on and on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There’s one! There’s one! There’s one! Oh, throw
something to make it go faster. Throw something! Quick!
Quick! Quick! No—I don’t mean to <span class='it'>hit</span> it. I don’t mean
to <span class='it'>hurt</span> it. To make it swim faster! There! I <span class='it'>can’t</span> throw
straight. Oh, do look at its head breathing and puffing!
Oh, what ripples it makes!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Conjured in this way to join in this sport, Wolf did
pick up an enormous piece of wet mud and hurled it in
the trail of the swimming rat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The muddy ripples from this missile came rushing up
behind that pointed little head, came splashing against
those pointed little ears. Gerda clasped her hands.
“Swim! Swim! Swim!” she called out; and then in her
excitement she pouted her mouth into a reed-mouth and
uttered a long, strange, low, liquid cry that was like no
sound Wolf had ever heard in his life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s gone! It’s done it!” she sighed at last, when the
rat, emerging from the water without so much as one
shake of its sleek sides, slid off along its mud-channel to
its bed in the reed-roots. “It’s gone! And you <span class='it'>did</span> make it
swim! I liked to see it. Let’s go rat-swimming often. It’s
wonderful!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She began walking along the river-bank in the direction
leading away from Blacksod, gazing intently and
rapturously at the sluggish brown stream.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf followed her, but he surreptitiously glanced at
his watch, and discovered, as he suspected, that it was
already late in the afternoon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You can’t tell when twilight begins,” he thought to
himself, “when the sky is <span class='it'>all</span> twilight.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hush!” The sound reached him rather by implication
than by ear. But the girl had crouched down under an
overhanging alder and was staring at the water, her
long cream-coloured arms supporting half the weight of
her body.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He sat down himself and waited patiently. It satisfied
his nature with an ineffable satisfaction to watch that
steady flow of the brown water, gurgling round the
willow-roots and the muddy concavities of the bank. He
felt glad that the Lunt, where he was now watching it,
had left the town behind and was now to meet with
nothing else really contaminating until it mingled with
the Bristol Channel. He had already begun to feel a
peculiar personal friendliness toward this patient muddy
stream; and it gave him pleasure to think that its
troubles were really over, when itself might so easily be
fearing another Blacksod somewhere between these green
meadows and the salt sea to which it ran! Looking quite
as intently at these brown waters as Gerda herself was
doing, it occurred to him how different a thing the personality
of a river is from the personality of a sea. The
water of the sea, though broken up into tides and waves,
really remains the same identical mass of waters; whereas
the water of a river is at every succeeding moment a completely
different body. No particles of it are ever the same,
unless they get waylaid in some side-stream or ditch or
weir.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf tried to visualize the whole course of the Lunt,
so as to win for it some sort of coherent personality.
By thinking <span class='it'>of all its waters together</span>, from start to
finish, this unity could be achieved; for between the
actual water before him now, into which he could thrust
his hand, and the water of that tiny streamlet among the
mid-Dorset hills from which it sprung, there was no
spacial gap. The one flowed continuously into the other.
They were as completely united as the head and tail of
a snake! The more he stared at the Lunt the more he liked
the Lunt. He liked its infinite variety; the extraordinary
number of its curves and hollows and shelving ledges
and pools and currents; the extraordinary variety of
organic patterns in the roots and twigs and branches and
land-plants and water-plants which diversified its course.</p>

<p class='pindent'>While he was thinking all this he had turned his attention
away from Gerda; but now, glancing up the river,
he was struck by a gleam of living whiteness amid the
greenery. The huntress of water-rats had slipped off her
shoes and stockings and was dabbling her bare feet in the
chilly brown water. Her face was bent down. She was not
being provocative this time. He felt sure of that. Or, if so,
the provocation was directed to something older and less
rational than the senses of man. She was giving way to
some immemorial girlish desire to expose warm, naked
limbs to the cold embraces of the elements.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rose to his feet, and, moving slowly up to her side,
sat down by her. He was struck by the fact that she made
no movement to pull her skirts down over her knees. But
once again he was made aware, he could not quite tell
how, that there was no provocation in this. She had indeed,
as Darnley had said, something of the “terrible passivity”
of the famous daughter of Leda. Certainly Wolf
had never seen, in picture, in marble, or in life, anything
as flawless as the loveliness thus revealed to him. It was
amazing to him that she did not shiver with the cold. The
whole scene, as the hour of twilight grew near, had that
kind of unblurred enamelled distinctness such as one
sees in the work of certain old English painters. The
leaf-buds of the alder under which she sat were of that
shade of green that seems to have something almost unnatural
in its metallic opacity; and the line of southern
sky against which the opposite bank was outlined was of
that livid steel-grey which seems to hold within it a
suppressed whiteness, like the whiteness of a sword that
lies in shadow.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re sure you’re not cold?” Wolf asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Of course I’m cold, silly! I’m doing this <span class='it'>to</span> feel
cold!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What a sensualist you are!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Better say nothing if you can’t say anything nicer
than that.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gerda.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Have you enjoyed yourself today?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do you mean?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Have you been happy today?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She did not answer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All about those white ankles and those white knees the
greenness of the earth gathered—the greyness of the sky
descended. It was as if such vague non-human powers,
made up of green shadows and grey shadows, drew the
girl back and away—back and away from all his human
words, back and away from all his personal desires.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Commonplace and irrelevant seemed both his sentiment
and his cunning in the face of these two great
silent Presences—that of the earth and that of the sky—which
were closing in upon her and upon himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But it was getting too cold. He must make her put on
her things and come home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s enough now,” he said. “On with your stockings,
like a good girl. I don’t know when your people expect
you back; but anyhow I mustn’t keep Mrs. Otter waiting.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He took her by the wrist and pulled her up the bank.
Then he began vigorously rubbing her ice-cold ankles
with his hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You do take care of me nicely,” she said, when
finally he pulled her frock over her knees and smoothed
out the wrinkles from her cream-coloured coat. “Bob
never used to stop for a minute. He was always doing
up his tackle or washing his fish or something. And if I
<span class='it'>did</span> ask him to stop he thought I wanted him to mess
me about—you know?—when it was only, like now, that
I just <span class='it'>couldn’t</span> get my boots on! They get so stiff and
funny when you take them off. I never understand why.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf’s mind was in no mood to deal with the
abstract problem of damp leather. He was wondering in
his heart whether Gerda’s mania for water-rats had anything
to do with the close resemblance between Mr. Weevil
and these harmless rodents.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What we’ve got to think about now,” he said, “is the
shortest way to Blacksod.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, don’t worry! We can be at my house in three-quarters
of an hour and then you can take the short-cut
to Barton.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was very much struck by the competent geographical
skill with which she now proceeded to guide
him, over hedge and over ditch, until they reached a
navigable lane.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We’ll be home in half an hour now,” she said, and the
two walked rapidly side by side between the cold, fresh
shoots of the hawthorn-hedges and the dark sheen of the
celandine-leaves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think I’d be all right now, married to <span class='it'>you</span>,” said
Gerda, suddenly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She made the remark in as unemotional and matter-of-fact
a tone as if she had said, “I think I’d be all right now
if I used low-heeled boots.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In that chilly twilight, with the white mist rising
around them, everything seemed so phantasmal, that this
surprising observation gave him no kind of shock. But
he did remember how startled he had felt when Christie
Malakite introduced the same idea.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wonder how I should feel married to <span class='it'>you</span>!” murmured
Wolf in response, deliberately putting a nuance
of irresponsible lightness into his tone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think we’d get on splendidly,” she retorted, with
an emphasis that was more boyish than girlish. They
walked for a while in silence after this, and Wolf became
vividly aware how completely a definite responsible
project of such a kind tended to break the delicious spell
of care-free intimacy. It broke it for him, anyway. But it
must have been just the reverse with her. The beauty of
the situation with her evidently had to find its justification
in some continuity of events beyond the mere pleasure
of the passing moment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But it was impossible to prevent his thoughts hovering
round this bold idea, now it <span class='it'>had</span> been flung into the air.
Christie Malakite had been the first to toss the fatal little
puffball upon the wind. <span class='it'>She</span> had done it with the utmost
gravity, the gravity of some remote being altogether outside
the stream of events. He remembered the peculiar
steady look of her brown eyes as she uttered the words.
But that this airy nothing of speculation should have received
a new impetus from Gerda herself was another
matter. He began to wonder what kind of relations existed
between these two young girls.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Splashing up the water from a puddle on his right
with the end of his stick, he hazarded a direct question
on this point.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I had tea yesterday with Christie Malakite,” he said,
“and she told me she was a friend of yours. I liked her so
very much.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I shan’t ever be jealous of Christie!” was his
companion’s reply to this. “I don’t care if you have tea
with Christie every day of your life. <span class='it'>She’s for no man</span>, as
the game says.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What game, Gerda?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, don’t you know? That old game! Kids play it together.
<span class='it'>We</span> called it ‘Boys and Girls’; but likely enough
where you come from they call it something else! But it’s
the same old game, I reckon.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why do you say Christie Malakite’s ‘for no man,’
Gerda?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t ask so many questions, Mr. Wolf Solent.
<span class='it'>That’s</span> your fault—asking questions! <span class='it'>That’s</span> what’ll make
me cross when we’re married, more than anything
else.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But it’s such a queer expression—‘She’s for no man.’
Does it mean she’s got lovers who aren’t human? Does
it mean she’s got demon lovers?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He spoke in a mocking, exaggerated manner, and his
tone was irritating to his companion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Men think too much of themselves,” she replied
laconically. “I like Christie very much and she likes me
very much.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This silenced Wolf; and they walked together in less
harmony than at any previous moment in that afternoon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They hit the town by a narrow alley between the town-hall
and Chequers Street. Wolf looked at his watch
and compared it with the town-hall clock. It was a quarter
past six. There was still plenty of time for him to reach
Pond Cottage before eight, when the Otters dined.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They drifted slowly down Chequers Street, Gerda making
all manner of quaint, humorous remarks about the
people and things they passed; and yet, through it all,
Wolf was perfectly aware that she had not forgiven him
the hard, frivolous tone he had adopted about her friend.
That she was able to chatter and delay as she was now
doing had something magnanimously pathetic and even
boyish about it. Most girls, as he well knew, would have
punished him for the little discordance between them by
hurrying home in silence and shutting him out without
the comfort of any further appointments. To act in any
other way would have seemed to such minds to be lacking
in proper pride. But Gerda appeared to have no
pride at all in this sense. Or was it that her pride was
really something that actually did resemble that high,
passive nonchalance which permitted the old classical
women to speak of themselves quite calmly, as if they
were external to themselves; as if they saw their life as
an irresponsible fate upon which they could, as it were,
lie back without incurring any human blame?</p>

<p class='pindent'>They said good-bye at the gate of Torp’s yard; and
when Wolf enquired how soon he could see her again,
“Oh, any day you like, except tomorrow and Monday,”
she replied. “I’ve enjoyed myself very much,” she added,
as she held out her hand. “I’m glad you made me
go.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was on the point of asking her what her engagements
were on Sunday and Monday; but he thought better
of it in time, and taking off his cap and waving his
stick he turned and strode away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was very nearly dark when the last little villa on the
King’s Barton road was left behind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He walked slowly forward under a starless sky, revolving
his adventure. He recognized clearly enough that his
first infatuation had changed its quality not a little.
Gerda was now not only a maddeningly desirable girl.
She was a girl with a definite personality of her own.
That bird-like whistling! Never had he known such a
thing was possible! It accounted as nothing else could do
for her queer, unembarrassed silences. In fact, it was the
expression of her silences—and not only of hers! It was,
as he recalled its full effect upon him, the expression of
just those mysterious silences in Nature which all his
life long he had, so to speak, waited upon and worshipped.
That strange whistling was the voice of those
green pastures and those blackthorn-hedges, not as they
were when human beings were conscious of them, but as
they were in that indescribable hour just before dawn,
when they awoke in the darkness to hear the faint, faint
stirrings—upon the air—of the departing of the non-human
powers of the night!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was so absorbed in his thoughts that it was with
quite a startled leap of the heart that he became conscious
of hurried, uneven steps behind him. What kind of steps
were they? They didn’t sound like the steps of a
grown-up person—either man or woman—they were so
light in the dark road. And yet somehow they didn’t resemble
the footsteps of a child. Wolf became aware of an
odd feeling of uneasiness. With all his habitual mysticism
he was a man little subject to what are called <span class='it'>psychic</span> impressions.
Yet on this occasion he could not help a somewhat
discomfortable beating of his heart. The last thing
he desired was to be overtaken by something unearthly
on that pleasant Dorset road! Had the extraordinary
phenomenon of the girl’s whistling unsettled his nerves
more than he realized?</p>

<p class='pindent'>His first simple and cowardly instinct was to quicken
his own steps. In fact, it was with a quite definite effort
that he prevented himself from setting off at a run! What
was it? Who was it? He listened intently as he walked;
and this listening in itself induced him to diminish his
speed rather than to increase it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At last the mysterious maker of this uncertain wavering
series of footsteps arrived close at his heels.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf swung round, grasping his stick tightly. Nothing
on earth could have prevented a certain strained unnaturalness
in his voice as he challenged this pursuer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hullo!” he cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was no answer, and the figure came steadily
along till it was parallel with him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he did, in a rush of relief, recognize this nightwalker’s
identity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Even in the darkness he recognized that shabby, derelict
personality he had seen in the street with Lob Torp the
day before. It was the Vicar of King’s Barton!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was surprised afterwards at this sudden recognition;
though it was not the only occasion in his life when he
had used a kind of sixth sense.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But whatever may have been its cause, Wolf’s clairvoyance
on this occasion was not shared by his overtaker.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. is .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. dark .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. tonight,” said
the clergyman, in a voice so husky and hoarse that it
resembled the voice attributed to the discomposed visage
of the King of Chaos by the poet Milton.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s own voice was quite natural now.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So dark that I took <span class='it'>you</span> for some kind of ghost,” he
said grimly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hee! Hee! Hee!” The Vicar laughed with the laugh
of a man who makes a mechanical, appreciative noise.
This hollow sound would doubtless have passed harmlessly
enough in the daylight. In the darkness it was
ghastly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You came up very quickly,” remarked Wolf. “You
must be a good walker, Mr. Valley.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. are .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. if .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. don’t
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. mind .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. my .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. asking?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not at all, Mr. Valley. I am the new secretary at the
Squire’s.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man stopped dead-still in the road; and, in
natural politeness, Wolf stopped too.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You are .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. other .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. one .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Then .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. must .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. see you later .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I buried him.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I said prayers for him every day .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. He .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
was .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very kind to me. I must see you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
later.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” Having uttered these words, the Vicar
seemed to gather up out of the dark some new kind of
strength; for he moved forward by Wolf’s side with a
firmer step.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For nearly half a mile they walked side by side in
silence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then the quavering voice out of the obscurity began
again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Valley .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. is my name.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You’ve got it quite
right. T. E. Valley.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. drink more than’s good
for me.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’m a little drunk tonight .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but you’ll
excuse me. In the dark it isn’t noticeable. But you’re
quite right. T. E. Valley is quite right. I was in the
Eleven at Ramsgard.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I play still.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I play with
the boys.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once more there was no sound but that of the two
men’s feet in the road and the thud—thud—thud of
Wolf’s stick.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then the voice recommenced. “The poor people here
are very kind to me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very kind to T. E. Valley. But
for the rest .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He again stopped dead-still in the road and Wolf
stopped with him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“For the rest .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. except .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Darnley .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. they are
all .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You won’t tell them, will you? They are all
devils! Devils! Devils!” His voice rose in a kind of
helpless fury. Then, after a moment’s pause: “But they
can’t hurt T. E. Valley. None of ’em can .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. drunk or
sober .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and that’s because I’m God’s Priest in this
place.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. God’s Priest, Sir! However you like to
take it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This final outburst seemed to restore the shadowy little
man to his senses; for until Wolf brought him to the gate
of the Vicarage and bade him farewell there, his words
became steadily more coherent—his intonation more
normal and more sober.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The door of Pond Cottage was opened for Wolf by
Dimity Stone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve kept dinner back till it’s as good as ruined,”
grumbled the old woman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where are——” Wolf began.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“In there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. waiting!” she answered, as she moved
off.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He opened the drawing-room door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I am so very sorry, Mrs. Otter,” he said humbly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They all rose from their seats; but it was Jason who
spoke first.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>Everything’s</span> only waiting,” he chuckled grimly.
“That sofa is a better place for waiting than a headmaster’s
study!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My son doesn’t mean that you’ve kept us a minute,”
said Mrs. Otter. “Dimity’s only just ready. But we’ll sit
down at the table while you wash your hands; so that
you can feel quite happy.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t be long, Solent!” cried Darnley, as Wolf turned
to go upstairs. “Mother won’t let us touch a morsel till
you come.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he entered his bedroom he heard Mrs. Otter’s
voice. “Dimity! Dimity! We’re quite ready!” And then,
just as he was closing the door, he caught something
about “these secretaries” from Jason.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap06'>BAR SINISTER</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Breakfast in Pond Cottage on that Sunday morning
proved to be the pleasantest meal that Wolf had yet enjoyed
under the Otter roof.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Otter, dressed in stiff puce-coloured silk, and happy
to have both her sons at the table, spoke at some length to
their guest about the morning service in the church to which
she and Darnley were presently to go. She explained to
him how much she liked the quiet, reverent manner in
which Mr. Valley conducted the worship of the parish.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He makes me sad at other times,” she said. “He’s an
unhappy little man; and everyone knows how he drinks.
He ought to have a wife to look after him, or at least a
housekeeper. He’s got no one in the house. How he gets
enough to eat I can’t imagine.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mother thinks no household can get on for a day
without a woman in it,” said Darnley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason Otter’s pallid face reddened a little. “Of course,
we know he wants to be the only man that any of the
village-boys admire. It’s human nature—that’s what it is.
These country clergymen are all the same.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There are the bells!” cried Mrs. Otter, thankful for
the opportunity of staving off discord between the
brothers. They all four listened in silence, while the faint
notes from the Henry the Seventh tower penetrated the
walls of Pond Cottage.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That means it’s ten o’clock,” said Darnley. “They
ring again at half-past, don’t they, Mother?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt an extraordinary sense of peacefulness in the
air that morning. The sound of the bells accentuated it;
and he wondered vaguely to himself whether he wouldn’t
offer to go to church with the mother and the son.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“By the way,” he remarked, “may I ask you people a
question, while I think of it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They all three awoke from their individual meditations
and gave him their undivided attention. Mrs. Otter
did this with serene complacency, evidently assuming
that the nature of his remark would prove harmless and
agreeable. Jason did it with nervous concern, touched
with a flicker of what looked like personal fear. Darnley
did it with an expression of weary politeness, as much as
to say, “Oh, God! Oh, God! Am I not going to have even
Sunday free from other people’s problems?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s a simple enough thing,” Wolf said quickly,
realizing that he had made more stir than he intended.
“I only wanted to know why this house of yours is
called Pond Cottage, when there’s no trace of a pond.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was an instantaneous sign of startled agitation
all the way round the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The pond is there all right,” said Darnley, quietly.
“It’s over that hedge, just outside our gate, the other
side of the lane. It’s rather an uncomfortable topic with
us, Solent; because at least three times James Redfern
thought of drowning himself in it. He may have thought
of it more times than that. Jason found him there three
times. We don’t like the pond for that reason. That’s
all!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason Otter got up from his chair. “I’ll go and put on
my boots,” he remarked to Wolf, “and we’ll go and
visit the pond. You ought to see it. And there are other
things I can show you, too, while mother and Darnley
are in church. You’ve got your boots on, I think? Well!
I won’t keep you very long.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He left the room as he spoke and Mrs. Otter looked
appealingly at her younger son.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t worry, Mother dear,” said Darnley, gravely,
laying his hand upon her knees.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned to Wolf. “You must help us in keeping my
brother in good spirits, Solent,” he said. “But I know
I can trust you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Wolf and Jason did finally cross the lane together
and enter the opposite field—which they achieved
by climbing up a steep bank and pushing their way
through a gap in the hedge—the sense of peacefulness in
the whole air of the place had intensified to a degree that
was so enchanting to Wolf that nothing seemed able to
disturb his contentment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The field he found himself in was a very large one, and
only a broken, wavering line of willows and poplars at
the further end of it gave any indication of the presence
of water. The atmosphere was deliciously hushed and
misty; no wind was stirring; and the placid morning sun
fell upon the grass and the trees with a sort of largeness of
indifference, as if it were too happy, in some secretive
way of its own, to care whether its warmth gave pleasure
or the reverse to the lives that thrived under its influence.
It seemed to possess the secret of complete detachment,
this sunshine; but it seemed also to possess the
secret of projecting the clue to such detachment into the
heart of every living existence that its vaporous warmth
approached.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was suddenly aware of a rising to the surface of
his mind of that trance-like “mythology” of his. All the
little outward things that met his gaze seemed to form so
many material moulds into which this magnetic current
set itself to run.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He surveyed a patch of sun-dried cattle-dung upon
which the abstracted Jason had inadvertently planted his
foot and across which was slowly moving with exquisite
precaution a brilliantly green beetle. He surveyed a
group of small crimson-topped daisies over which a
sturdy, flowerless thistle threw a faint and patient
shadow. He surveyed the disordered flight of a flock of
starlings, heading away from the pond towards the village.
But of all these things what arrested him most was
the least obvious, the least noticeable. It was, in fact,
no more than a certain ridge of rough unevenness in the
ground at his feet; a nameless unevenness, which assumed,
as the misty sunlight wavered over it, the predominant
place in this accidental pattern of impressions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason said nothing at all as they walked together slowly
across the field. The man had ostentatiously avoided any
approach to Sunday clothes that morning; and, without
hat or stick, in a very shabby overcoat, he presented
rather a lamentable figure, as he led the way forward towards
Lenty Pond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They reached the willows and poplars at last; and
Wolf stared in astonishment at what he saw. He found
himself standing on the brink of an expanse of water
that was nearly as large as a small lake. The opposite
side of it was entirely covered with a bed of thick reeds,
among which he could see the little red-and-black shapes
of several moor-hens moving; but from where he stood,
under these willows, right away to the pond’s centre, the
water was deep and dark, and even on that placid Sunday
a little menacing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He could have done it easily if he’d wanted to,
couldn’t he?” said Jason, gazing at the water. “The truth
is he <span class='it'>didn’t</span> want to! Darnley’s a sentimental fool. Redfern
<span class='it'>didn’t</span> want to drown himself. Not a bit of it. What
did he come here for, then? He came to rouse pity, to
make people’s minds go crazy with pity.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The man must have been thinking of saying just this
to me all the way across the field,” thought Wolf. But
Jason jerked out now a much more disturbing sentence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The boy did upset <span class='it'>one</span> person’s mind. He made one
person’s mind feel like a weed in this water! And you’d
be surprised to hear who that person was.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf just then felt it very hard to give him his
complete attention. For although the mystical ecstasy he
had just experienced had faded, everything about the day
had become momentous in his hidden secretive life; and
he felt detached, remote, disembodied, for all his Sunday
clothes. He could hear the cawing of a couple of rooks
high up in the sky; and even when they ceased cawing,
the creaking of their wings seemed like the indolence
of the very day itself. “A weed in the water,” he echoed
mechanically; while his mind, voyaging over those
hushed West Country pastures, followed the creaking
wings.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who was it, Mr. Otter, who was so upset by Redfern?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The appeal in Jason’s miserable eyes grew still more
disturbing. The man’s soul seemed to come waveringly
forward, like a grey vapour, out of its eye-sockets, till it
formed itself into a shadowy double of the person who
stood by Wolf’s side.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Can’t you guess?” murmured Jason Otter. “It was I
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You’re surprised. Well, anyone <span class='it'>would</span>
be. You wouldn’t have thought of that, though you are
Mr. Urquhart’s secretary and <span class='it'>have</span> come from a college!
But you needn’t look like that; for it’s true! Darnley
sentimentalizes about his death, which was unfortunate,
of course, but perfectly natural—he died of pneumonia,
as any of us might!—but what drove me to distraction
was this playing upon a person’s pity. He always did it—from
the very first day. Darnley yielded to it at once,
though he never liked the boy. I resisted it. I am of iron
in these things. I know too much. But by degrees, can’t
you understand, though I didn’t yield to it, it began to
bother my mind. Pity’s the most cruel trap ever invented.
You can see that, I suppose? Take it that there were only
one unhappy person left, why, it might spoil all the delight
in the world! That is why I’d like to kill pity—why
I’d like to make people see what madness it is.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf drew away from him a step or two, till he stood
at the very edge of the pond, and then he remarked
abruptly, “Your mother told me that Redfern was one of
the most good-looking young men she has ever seen.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Having flung out these words, he began flicking the
dark, brimming water with the end of his stick, watching
the ripples which he caused spreading far out towards the
centre. Exactly why he made that remark just then he
would have found it hard to explain. The wraith-like
phantom-soul that had emerged from Jason’s eye-sockets
drew back instantaneously, like a puppet pulled by a
string; and over the two apertures into which it withdrew
there formed a glacial film of guarded suspicion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>I</span> have seen better-looking ones,” said Jason Otter
drily. “He used to help that fool Valley in his High
Church services. I don’t know whether the Virgin Mary
ever appeared to him; but I know he used to take her
flowers, because he used to steal them out of our garden!
My mother let him steal because it was—— Hullo!
What’s up now? Who’s this?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf swung round and observed to his surprise the
tall figure of Roger Monk advancing towards them across
the field.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s something for you. It’s something about you,”
said Jason, hurriedly. “I think I’ll walk round the pond.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why do that?” protested Wolf. “There’ll be no secret
about it, even if it <span class='it'>is</span> for me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’ll like to find you alone best. These servants of
these landowners always do,” replied the other. “Besides,
Mr. Urquhart hates me. He knows I know what he is.
He’s not a common kind of fool. He likes having good
meals and good wine, but he’s ready to risk all that for I
don’t know what!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I tell you I have no secrets with Urquhart,” rejoined
Wolf. “There’s absolutely no need for you to leave us.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This gardener looked at me very suspiciously yesterday,”
whispered Jason. “I saw him through the hedge, in
his garden. He was planting something, but he kept
looking at the hedge. He must have known I was there.
He must have been wondering whether he dared shoot
at me with a shotgun. So good-bye! I’m going to walk
round the pond very slowly.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf moved toward Mr. Monk, leaving his companion
to shuffle off as he pleased. The gigantic servant looked
like a respectable prize-fighter in his Sunday clothes.
When the two men met he took from his pocket a telegram
and handed it to Wolf, touching his hat politely as he
did so.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This came early,” he said. “But there was no one
else to send; and I had to tend to things before I could
bring it myself. If there’s any answer, ’twill have to go
by way of Blacksod, for our office shuts at noon.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf opened the telegram. It was from his mother, and
ran as follows:</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='pindent'>“ARRIVE RAMSGARD SEVEN O’CLOCK SUNDAY NIGHT TRADESMEN
HAVE NO SENSE COULD SLEEP AT LOVELACE.”</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>“There’s no answer, Monk,” he said gravely; and then,
after prodding the ground thoughtfully with his stick,
and looking at the figure of Jason Otter, which was now
stationary behind a poplar-tree, “This is from my
mother,” he added. “She is coming down from town
tonight.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Very nice for you, Sir, I’m sure,” murmured the man.
“ ’Tain’t every gentleman has <span class='it'>got</span> a mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But the difficulty is, Monk,” Wolf went on, “that
my mother wants to stay down here. You don’t happen
to know of any cottage or any rooms in a cottage that
we could get for a time, do you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Roger Monk looked at him thoughtfully. “Not that I
knows of, Sir,” he began, his gipsy-like eyes wandering
from Wolf’s face to the landscape in front of him, a portion
of which landscape included the figure of Mr. Otter,
hiding behind the poplar-tree.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That is to say, Sir, unless by any chance .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but
that ain’t likely, Sir.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do you mean, Monk?” enquired the other,
eagerly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Twere only that I myself live lonesome-like in me
own place .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and seeing you’re helping Squire with
his writings .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and Lenty Cottage be neat set up, I
were just thinking——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf swung his stick. “The very thing!” he cried excitedly.
In a flash his imagination became abnormally
active. He visualized this gardener’s house in all its details.
He saw himself, as well as his mother, snugly ensconced
there for years and years .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. perhaps for the
rest of their lives!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But we should be a nuisance to you, Monk, even if
the Squire <span class='it'>were</span> amenable, shouldn’t we?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man shook his head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I’ll come straight home with you now, Monk,
if I may,” said Wolf impatiently. “Were you going home
now?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I was.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I’ll just run and tell Mr. Otter; and then I’ll
come with you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He left the man standing where they had been talking,
and hurried round the edge of the pond. There was something
peculiarly appealing to him in the idea of this
cottage. How pleasant it would be, he thought, when he
and his mother were living together there some five years
hence, if he happened to say to her, as he came in to tea
from his Sunday walk, with a bunch of primroses in his
hand, “I came past Lenty Pond today, Mother, where I
first heard about the chance of our settling here!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found Jason sitting on the roots of the poplar,
leaning his back against the tree-trunk and holding the
tails of his overcoat stretched tightly over his knees, so
that he should be entirely concealed from view.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That man hasn’t gone,” was his greeting to Wolf.
“He’s standing there still.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know he is, Otter. He’s brought a telegram for me.
My mother’s coming down tonight. Monk says he doesn’t
see any reason why she and I shouldn’t take rooms in his
cottage.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason looked up at him from where he sat upon the
poplar-root, and the whimsical manner in which he
hugged his coat-tails was accentuated by a smile of
hobgoblinish merriment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You mean to live in it?” he remarked. “You and
your mother? I don’t believe old Urquhart would consider
such a thing for a moment! These squires like to
show off their servants’ quarters. They like to take their
guests round and say: ‘That’s where my head-gardener
lives. He works at <span class='it'>his</span> garden when he’s finished with
mine! Those are “Boule de neige” roses!’ But when it
comes to honest people lodging in places like that—goodness!
Urquhart wouldn’t consider it. But you can
try. But my advice to you is to be very careful in this
matter. You never know what troubles you’ll have when
you deal with people like this Monk. But you can try.
There! you’d better go off with him. He’s peeping and
spying at this moment. He’s thinking I’m holding you
back because of the money you pay us.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf shook his head and made a movement to be gone,
but the other bent forward a little and whispered up at
him: “I’ll walk slowly round the pond; <span class='it'>then</span> if he looks
back he won’t think you ought to wait for me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>With this complicated and obscure sentence floating
on the surface of his mind, Wolf left his companion to
his own devices and rejoined Roger Monk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not more than twenty minutes’ walking brought them
to the gardener’s cottage. To Wolf’s great satisfaction
the place proved to be quite out of sight of the manorhouse
on the Ramsgard side of the orchards and the
kitchen-gardens. It stood, indeed, in Lenty Lane, a little
east of the drive-gates, and turned out to be a solid little
cottage, pleasantly coated with white paint, and approached
from the lane by a neat gravel-path, on either
side of which was a row of carefully whitewashed small
round stones. Wolf for some reason didn’t like the look
of those white stones. Once more he regarded Lenty
Cottage. The idea of its excessive neatness and tidiness,
combined with the idea of its being so long empty except
for this one man, troubled his nerves in some odd way.
What <span class='it'>did</span> it suggest to him? Ah, he had it! It suggested
the peculiar lonely trimness .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so extraordinarily forbidding
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. of a gaoler’s house outside a prison-gate,
or a keeper’s house outside a lunatic-asylum.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, let’s see the inside,” he said, turning to his
companion. “Mr. Urquhart might as well have put me
up here at first.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The other gave him one of his equivocal glances.
“ ’Twere the matter of meals, I expect, Sir,” he said
cautiously. “But if the lady comes, things will be different,
no doubt.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Then you’d be pleased to have us here?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This time the gardener’s look was direct and eager.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d be glad enough to have a gent like yourself
sleeping under this here roof,” he cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They entered the house together and the matter was
soon arranged between them. When things were settled,
Wolf observed the man rubbing one of his hands up and
down the back of a chair. “I’d give a hundred pounds
to get a place in them Shires again!” he burst out
suddenly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf looked at him in astonishment. “You don’t like
it here, Monk,” he murmured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Like it?” The man’s voice sank to a whisper. “ ’Tis
easier to enter a gentleman’s service than to leave it,
Sir, when that gentleman be the sort of Nebuchadnezzar
my master be!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You aren’t a Dorset man, then?” enquired Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I were born here,” replied the other, “but I left home
when I were a kiddie, and worked in they Shires.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This remark made clear to Wolf a great deal about
Roger Monk. The upper layers of the man’s mind were
sophisticated by travel. The deeper ones retained their indigenous
imprint.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I must go back to Pond Cottage now,” Wolf
said calmly. “Mrs. Otter and Mr. Darnley ought to be
back from church by this time, and I must talk to them.
We’ll arrange about terms, Monk, after I’ve seen Mr.
Urquhart. Do you suppose I should find him at home
now, if I looked in on my way to the cottage?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A frown of concentrated concern clouded the countenance
of the man in front of him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It certainly would be best,” he remarked, “if it could
be done. What he’ll say to it, I don’t know, I’m sure.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>With these words ringing in his ears, Wolf, some
fifteen minutes later, found himself admitted to Mr.
Urquhart’s presence. He discovered his employer in his
study, reading with fascinated interest the book which
his new secretary had brought him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“These Evershotts will be the making of our history,”
he chuckled, in high glee. “You did well with old Malakite.
Five pounds for this? I tell you, it’s worth twenty!
You’re a capital ambassador, Mr. Solent! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Eh?
What’s that? Your mother coming here? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Monk’s
front-rooms?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He straightened out his legs and smoothed back his
glossy hair from each side of that carefully brushed
parting. With his great white face drooping a little on
one side, with the flabby folds under his eyelids pulsing
as if they possessed an independent life of their own, he
made an unpleasant impression on Wolf’s mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart’s study was a small, dingy room, the
walls of which were entirely covered by eighteenth-century
prints. The Squire sat in a low, leather chair,
with the Evershott chronicle on his knees; and as Wolf
settled himself opposite him in a similar chair, he began
to feel that, after all, he was probably exaggerating the
peculiarities of King’s Barton Manor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s my nervous imagination, I expect,” he said to
himself. “Urquhart’s no doubt like hundreds of other
eccentric men of leisure. And as for the gardener’s chatter—I
suppose servants are always glad to grumble to a
stranger.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Didn’t my predecessor live in Monk’s house?” he
found himself saying.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The squire lifted his hand from the book he held and
half raised it to his well-shaven chin. “Redfern? A little
while, perhaps. I really forget. Not long, anyway. That
drunken individual at Pond Cottage persuaded him to
go to them. It was with them he died. They told you <span class='it'>that</span>,
I suppose?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart’s voice was so placid and casual as he
made these remarks that Wolf was seized with a sort of
shame for letting his imagination run riot so among all
these new acquaintances. “It’s the difference from London!
That’s what explains it,” he thought to himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart now stopped scratching his chin with his
delicate finger-tips, and, bowing his head a little, fumbled
once more with the pages of the book upon his knee.
Wolf sank back into his deep armchair and stared at the
man’s tweed trousers and shiny patent-leather shoes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He drew a long breath that was something between a
sigh of weariness and a sigh of relief. His recent interviews
with Jason and Monk had given him the feeling
of being on the edge of a psychic maelstrom of morbid
conflicts. The comfort of this remote room and the ease
of this leather chair made him at once weary of agitations
and glad that he still could feel like a spectator rather
than a combatant.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After all, why should he worry himself? As the philosophical
Duke of Albany murmured in <span class='it'>King Lear</span>: “The
event! Well .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The event!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How will your mother appreciate sharing her
kitchen with my man?” said Mr. Urquhart suddenly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The remark irritated Wolf. What did this easy gentleman
know about the shifts of poverty? He was himself so
bent upon the arrangement that these little matters
seemed quite unimportant.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, she won’t mind that!” he responded carelessly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What put all this into Roger’s great, stupid, silly
head?” the squire went on, in his silkiest voice. “Is he
tired of my company? Does he want to leave my service
and enter your mother’s? What’s up with the man? It
isn’t the money. I know <span class='it'>that</span> much. Roger cares less for
money than any man I’ve ever dealt with. What can he
be up to now?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf remained silent, letting him run on. But in his
mind he set himself once more to wonder how far he
really <span class='it'>had</span> exaggerated the sinister element in his employer’s
character.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mr. Urquhart leaned forward now and regarded
him intently. “You won’t play me a trick, will you, like
the other one? But you’re not tricky, Mr. Solent, I can
see that! On my soul, I think you’re an honest young
man. Your face shows it. It has its faults <span class='it'>as</span> a face;
but it isn’t tricky.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. well .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. well! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
When does your mother arrive? I shall be interested to
have the honor of meeting her again. My cousin Carfax
was at one time—you know, I suppose?—excessively in
love with her.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Not tonight, eh? Well, perhaps
that’s as well. Mrs. Martin shall go over there and make
everything straight.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf rose to his feet at this point, anxious to take
his leave before the man had time to read him any passages
from the Evershott Diary. Once outside the house,
he took stock of the situation. He had settled matters
with the occupier and with the owner of his new abode.
The final arrangement he had to make was with Mrs.
Otter. Therefore, off he hurried to Pond Cottage, where
he found his hostess just returned from church.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But here he met with nothing but sympathy—whether,
in her secret heart she was glad to get rid of him, Wolf
could not say. She may have all the while regretted the
loss to her eldest son of that chamber whose walls Wolf
had so arbitrarily denuded. Well! They could put those
pictures back on those walls now! And he mentally resolved
to pay as few visits as possible to the bedroom of
Mr. Jason Otter. He had no wish to behold the countenance
of that “god of rain” again!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He left Pond Cottage soon after lunch, explaining that
he would return that night, but would have supper in
Ramsgard with his mother. The afternoon proved to be as
misty and warm as the earlier hours of the day; and as
he retraced the track of Thursday’s drive with Darnley,
he did not permit the various agitations into which he
had been plunged to destroy his delight in that relaxed
and caressing weather. He found that travelling on foot
in full daylight revealed to him many tokens of the
Spring that he had missed on his evening drive.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once or twice he descended into the ditches on either
side of the road, where the limp whitish-pink stalks of
half-hidden primroses drooped above their crinkled
leaves, and, with hands and knees embedded in the warm-scented
earth, pressed his face against those fragile apparitions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sweet, faint odour of these pale flowers made him
think of Gerda Torp, and he began worrying his mind
a good deal as to the effect of his mother’s arrival upon
the progress of his adventure.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Long before he reached the outskirts of Ramsgard he
was reminded of his approach to the famous West Country
School by the various groups of straw-hatted boys—tall,
reserved, disdainful—who seemed exploring, like
young Norman invaders, these humble pasture-lands of
the West Saxons.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One or two of the boys, as they passed him by, made
hesitating half-gestures of respectful recognition. One of
them actually lifted his straw-hat. Wolf became a little
embarrassed by these encounters. He wondered what kind
of a master these polite neophytes—for it must have
been the newcomers at the place who blundered in this
way—mistook him for! Did he look like a teacher of
French? Or did they take him for one of that high, remote,
aristocratic company—not masters at all, but
Governors of the ancient School?</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he got closer to the town, he had no difficulty in
espying both cemetery and workhouse across an expanse
of market-gardens and small enclosed fields. The look
of these objects, combined, as they were, with outlying
sheds and untidy isolated hovels, gave him a sensation
that he was always thrilled to receive—the peculiar sensation
that is evoked by any transitional ground lying
between town and country.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had never approached any town, however insignificant,
across such a margin, without experiencing a
queer and quite special sense of romance. Was it that
there was aroused in him some subtle memory of all the
intangible sensations that his ancestors had felt, each one
of them in his day, as, with so much of the unknown
before them, they approached or left, in their West
Country wandering, any of these historic places? Did,
in fact, some floating “emanation” of human regrets and
human hopes hover inevitably about such marginal
tracts—redolent of so many welcomes and so many
farewells?</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he arrived at last in the centre of the town and
came to the gate of the Abbey, it was a few minutes to
four o’clock. There was a languid afternoon service
ebbing to its end in the eastern portion of the dusky
nave; and, without entering the building, but lingering
in the Norman entrance, Wolf contemplated once more
that famous fan-tracery roof.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Those lovely organic lines and curves, up there in the
greenish dimness, challenged something in his soul that
was hardly ever stirred by any work of art; something
that was repelled and rendered actually hostile by the
kind of thing he had seen in that bedroom of Jason Otter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This high fan-tracery roof, into whose creation so much
calm, quiet mysticism must have been thrown, seemed
to appeal with an almost personal sympathy to Wolf’s
deepest mind. Uplifted there, in the immense stillness of
that enclosed space, above the dust and stir of all passing
transactions, is seemed to fling forth, like some great
ancient fountain in a walled garden, eternal arches of
enchanted water that sustained, comforted, and healed.
The amplitude of the beauty around him had indeed just
then a curious and interesting psychic effect. In place of
giving him the sensation that his soul had melted into
these high-arched shadows, it gave him the feeling that
the core of his being was a little, hard, opaque round
crystal!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Soothed, beyond all expectation, by this experience,
and fortified with a resolute strength by thinking of his
soul after this fashion, Wolf had nearly reached Selena
Gault’s door, when he remembered that he ought to make
sure of a room for his mother at the Lovelace Hotel before
he did anything else.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hurrying round by the station, therefore, where he
verified the time of the London train, he entered the office-hall
of the famous hostelry. No backwater of rural
leisure could have been more pulseless and placid than
that mellow interior, with its stuffed fox-heads and
mid-Victorian mahogany chairs. But it was with a shock
of dismay that he learned from the dignified lady in
charge of the hotel-books that owing to the approach of
the annual Spring Fair every room in the place was
already occupied. Wolf cursed the Fair and those horse-loving
magnates. But there was nothing for him but to
return to Miss Gault’s; for the smaller Ramsgard Inn
was at the further end of the town, and it was now five
o’clock.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He crossed the public gardens. He struck St. Aldhelm’s
Street just above the bridge and moved westward under
the long wall. He pushed open the green door and entered
the garden of hyacinths. The mechanical act of opening
that little gate, for no other reason than that it was a
gate from a street into a private enclosure, brought suddenly
into his mind his similar entrance into the Torp
yard; and the vein of amorousness in him, like a velvet-padded
panther in a blind night, slipped wickedly past
all the magic of yesterday’s walk and caused his heart
to beat at the imaginary image—for he had never actually
seen that provocative picture—of the young girl astride
the tombstone!</p>

<p class='pindent'>No sooner had the mute servant admitted him into
Selena’s drawing-room and closed the door behind him,
than he realized that his hostess was not alone. Not only
were all the cats there, but playing wildly with the cats,
like a young Bassarid with young tigers, was a curly-headed,
passionate little girl, of olive complexion, who,
even before Miss Gault had finished uttering the syllables
of her name, seized him by both hands and held up an
excited, magnetic mouth to be kissed. Off she went again,
however, to her play with the cats, which seemed to
arouse her to the limit of her nervous endurance, for her
cheeks were feverishly vivid and her dark eyes gleamed
like two great gems in the handle of a dagger—a dagger
that someone keeps furtively moving backwards and forwards
between a red flame and a window open to the
night.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As she pulled the cats to and fro and tumbled over
them and among them, on sofa and hearth-rug, she kept
up an incessant, excitable chatter; a chatter that struck
Wolf’s mind as resembling, in some odd manner, a substance
rather than a <span class='it'>sound</span>, for it seemed to supply a
part of the warm, dusky atmosphere in which she played,
and indeed seemed to require no vocal response from the
other persons in the room. It was like the swirl of a
swollen brook in a picture of Nicolas Poussin, in the
foreground of which a young brown goatherd plays for
ever with his goats.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Olwen Smith!” broke in Miss Gault, when she and
Wolf had seated themselves, after their first exchange of
greetings, and he had hurriedly given her a description
of Mr. Urquhart and Mr. Urquhart’s library. “Olwen
Smith!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little girl got up from the floor in a moment, and
came and stood by her friend’s knee.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You mustn’t be noisy when a gentleman’s here; and,
besides, you’ve got on your Sunday frock. Tell Mr. Solent
your name and where you live. Mr. Solent doesn’t like
noisy little girls, or little girls that talk all the time and
interrupt people.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I live at Number Eighty-Five North Street Ramsgard,”
repeated the child hurriedly. “I was eleven last Thursday.
Grandfather keeps the school hat-shop. Mother went
away when I was born. Miss Gault is my greatest friend.
Aunt Mattie is my mother now. I like the white cat best!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The child uttered these sentences as if they had been
a lesson which she had learned by heart. She stood obediently
by Selena Gault’s side; but her dark eyes fixed
themselves upon Wolf with an expression that he never
afterwards forgot, so wild, so mocking, so rebellious,
and yet so appealing did it seem.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Olwen loves my cats; but not nearly so much as my
cats love <span class='it'>her</span>,” said Selena Gault tenderly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little girl cuddled up to the black-gowned figure
and laid her head against the old maid’s sleeve. Her wild
spirit seemed to have ebbed away from every portion
of her body except her eyes. These refused to remove
themselves from those of the visitor; and, as his own
mood changed this way and that, these dusky mirrors
changed with it, reflecting thoughts that no child’s conscious
brain could possibly have understood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But you know you love your Aunt Mattie as if she
<span class='it'>were</span> your mother,” said Selena Gault. “She’s been so
good to you that you’d be a very ungrateful little girl
if you didn’t love her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I heard grandfather tell Aunt Mattie the other night
that she was no more <span class='it'>his</span> child than I was <span class='it'>her</span> child,”
responded Olwen Smith, mechanically stroking Miss
Gault’s hand like an affectionate little automaton, while
her feverish mocking eyes seemed to say to Wolf, “There,
watch the effect of <span class='it'>that</span>!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mattie’s mother died about twenty-five years ago,
child,” expostulated Miss Gault. “Her name was Lorna.
She and your grandfather used to have dreadful quarrels
before she died. That’s why Mr. Smith, when he gets
angry, says things like that. Of course Mattie is his
daughter; and it’s very wrong of him to say such things.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aunt Mattie’s <span class='it'>funny</span>,” murmured the little girl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hush, child!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But she is, <span class='it'>rather</span>! Just a tiny little bit funny, isn’t
she, Miss Gault?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Selena smiled at Wolf—that peculiar hypnotized smile
with which older people, who have given their souls into
children’s keeping, transform their pets’ worst faults into
qualities that are irresistibly engaging.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aunt Mattie’s got a nose like yours,” said Olwen
Smith.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Like mine?” murmured Selena Gault, reproachfully.
“You mustn’t be rude, Olwen dear. That’s one thing I
<span class='it'>can’t</span> have in my house.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The brown head was buried closer in the black silk
gown, but the child’s voice sounded clear enough.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not like yours, Miss Gault—like <span class='it'>his</span>! Exactly like
his!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Selena Gault had occasion at that moment to turn clean
away from both her visitors; for the mute servant entered
the room carrying the tea-tray. The arrangement of this
tray was evidently a matter of meticulous ritual in this
house, and Wolf surveyed it with silent satisfaction,
especially as the turbulent little girl ran off to play
with the cats and left Miss Gault free not only to fill his
cup, but also to attend unreservedly to his remarks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tea-tray was placed upon a round table at Miss
Gault’s side. A black kitchen-kettle—Miss Gault declared
that no other kind boiled <span class='it'>good</span> water—was placed upon
the hearth. The servant herself did not retire, as most
servants are wont to do at such a juncture, but remained
to assist at the ceremony of “pouring out,” a ceremony
which was so deftly accomplished that Wolf soon found
all his difficulties and annoyances melting away in the
fragrance of the most perfect cup of tea he had ever
tasted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The general effect of Miss Gault’s drawing-room, in
the pleasant mingling of twilight and firelight, began to
take on for his imagination the particular atmosphere
that he was wont, in his own mind, to think of as “the
Penn House atmosphere.” This implied that there was
something about this room which made him recall that
old bow-window in Brunswick Terrace, Weymouth, where
in his childhood he used to indulge in those queer,
secretive pleasures. There was not a single piece of
furniture in this room of Miss Gault’s which did not
project some essence of the past, tender and mellow as
the smell of potpourri.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He broke the silence now by a reference to his conversation
with Darnley in the Blacksod book-shop. “Otter
said——” he began.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hush!” cried Selena Gault; and then in a completely
different tone, addressing the silent child, who was
listening intently: “Olwen dear, you can go on playing!
You can make as much noise as you like now! We’ve
finished our conversation.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t want to play any more, Miss Gault. I hate all
your cats except this one! I want to hear Mr. Solent tell
you what Otter said!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll have to send you home, Olwen, if you don’t behave
better. It’s rude to interfere with grown-up people’s
conversation.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wasn’t interfering; I was listening. I’d never have
known about Aunt Mattie not being grandfather’s real
daughter if I hadn’t listened.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Be quiet, child!” cried Selena Gault. But the passionate
little girl’s shrill voice rose to a defiant shriek
as she jumped up from the sofa, flung the cat upon the
floor, shook back her tangled curls, and screamed aloud.
“And I’d never have known about Aunt Mattie not being
my real mother if I hadn’t listened!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>If Miss Gault had not managed the child with perfect
tact before, she rose to the occasion now.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all right, Olwen dear,” she said in the calmest
and most matter-of-fact voice. “I daresay it’s because
grown-up people talk such a lot of nonsense that they
get so cross when children listen. There! Look! You’ve
frightened your own favourite!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was when matters were at this point of psychic
equilibrium that Wolf decided that no more moments
must elapse before he informed his hostess of his mother’s
arrival. The nervous electricity with which the air of the
room was already vibrating, encouraged rather than
deterred him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Miss Gault!” he began suddenly when the tall black
figure had subsided into some kind of peace in her green
chair. “I’ve just had some rather serious news which I’d
better tell you at once.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Like a weary caryatid, sick of the burden of life, but
unyielding in her resolution to bear it without reproach
and without complaint, Selena Gault leaned forward toward
him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You needn’t tell me, boy; I can guess it. Ann Haggard’s
coming down here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He nodded in assent to her words, but a look of irritation
crossed his face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My mother and I have the same name,” he protested.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“When’s she coming? Oh, what a mistake you’ll make
if you let her come! What a mistake you’ll make!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve not had much choice,” remarked Wolf drily.
“She’s due now in a few minutes.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>What?</span>” gasped the lady, her deformed lip twitching
like some curious aquarium-specimen that has been
prodded by a visitor’s stick.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s due at seven o’clock.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“In Ramsgard again—after twenty-seven years! What
a thing! What a thing to happen!” gasped Selena Gault.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t know where the deuce I’m going to put her!
That’s where I want your advice. The Lovelace is all
filled up with people come in for the Spring Show.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault’s face was like an ancient amphitheatre
full of dusky gladiators. She took firm hold of the arms
of her chair to steady herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But at that moment a diversion offered itself which
distracted the attention of both of them. Olwen Smith,
who had been listening with fascinated intensity to what
they were saying, now burst in upon them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O Mr. Solent!” she cried. “<span class='it'>Do</span> let your mother have
our front-room for the night. Aunt Mattie takes lodgers,
though grandfather does sell the School hats! I <span class='it'>know</span>
Aunt Mattie would love to have your mother. Wouldn’t
she, Miss Gault? Do tell him she must come to us. Do
tell him, Miss Gault! He’ll let her come if you’ll only
say so!” And with that the child sidled up against their
hostess’s knees with such beguiling cajolery that Wolf
was surprised at the coldness with which the woman received
her appeal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She made a very faint movement with her two hands,
just as if the child had not been at her side at all—a
movement as if she were pressing down a load of invisible
earth over the roots of an invisible plant.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hush, child!” she said irritably. “You mustn’t interrupt
us like that. I’ve told you so often you mustn’t.
I’m sure your Aunt Mattie wouldn’t wish to have a guest
for only one night. No one likes an arrangement of that
sort.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the child, who had been watching her face with intense
scrutiny till this moment, now flung herself down
upon the floor and burst into furious crying. “I—want—her—to—come—to
us!” she wailed. “I want her to come!
It’s always like this when anything nice happens. You’re
unkind, Miss Gault! You’re very unkind!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then quite suddenly her tears stopped, her sobs
ceased; and, very solemnly, sitting upon the floor, hugging
her knees, looking up at the figure above her with
a tragic, lamentable face, “You are <span class='it'>prejudiced</span> against
me!” she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The word “prejudiced” sounded so unexpected and
so queer out of her mouth that it charmed away the old
maid’s agitation. “It’s all right, my dear,” she murmured,
stooping down and lifting her up, and covering
her hot forehead with kisses. “It’s all right, Olwen. Mr.
Solent shall bring his mother to your house.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She fell into a deep reverie, staring into vacancy.
Past the child’s curly head, which she held pressed against
her, she stared, past the puzzled and rather sulky profile
of Wolf, past the thick green curtains bordered with red-and-gold
braid, out into the gathering night, out into
many nights lost and gone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf now rather impatiently looked at his watch and
compared it with the clock upon the mantelpiece.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s half-past six,” he said brusquely, interrupting
Miss Gault’s thoughts.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The lady nodded gravely, and rising to her feet with
the child’s hand still in hers, “I’ll tell Emma to take
Olwen home,” she said, “and then she can tell Mattie
Smith to expect you. Say good-bye to Mr. Solent, little
one.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Olwen held out her hand with one of the most complicated
looks he had ever seen on a child’s face. It was
repentant, and yet it was triumphant. It was mocking
and mischievous, and yet it was, in a queer way, appealing
and wistful.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I’ll see you again,” said Wolf, stooping down
and kissing the child’s feverishly hot little fingers, “unless
they send you off to bed before we get to the house.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Olwen was obviously immensely relieved that he had
refrained from hugging her or kissing her face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Very sedate and dignified was the curtsey she now gave
him, turning round to manœuvre it as Miss Gault opened
the door; and he was left with that honourable glow of
satisfaction with which clumsy people are sometimes rewarded
who have been self-controlled enough to respect
the nervous individuality of a child.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Miss Gault returned and had closed the door,
she stood for a space regarding her visitor with the sort
of grave, concentrated look, not unmixed with misgiving,
that a commander in an involved campaign might give
to a trusty but over-impetuous subordinate whose limitations
of mind prohibit complete confidence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It will be awkward for her to go straight to these
Smiths, you know. But she’d have to meet them, I suppose,
sooner or later; and it <span class='it'>may</span> be all right. It’s like
taking the bull by the horns, anyway; which is what
Ann always did.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was silent. He was watching the hands of the
clock.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why did you let her come down here?” the old maid
broke out. “Are you her shadow? Are you tied to her
apron-strings? Can’t you see what it means to me, and
to others who remember <span class='it'>him</span>, to have to see her, to have
to speak to her? Haven’t you felt yourself that this is <span class='it'>his</span>
country, his corner of the world, his possession? Haven’t
you felt that? And yet you let his enemy, his vindictive
enemy, invade his very burying-ground!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s only retort to this impassioned speech was to
snatch at the lady’s hand and give it a hurried kiss. “You
mustn’t take it too seriously,” were his parting words.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he reached the station, he was met by the news
that the train was to be about an hour late.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This will worry our little Olwen!” he thought in
dismay. “They’ll send her to bed for a certainty. They’ll
think we’re not coming at all. They’ll think we’ve changed
our minds. And where shall we get supper when we <span class='it'>are</span>
there? Damn these teasing problems! I wish Mother had
waited till tomorrow.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The station was not a very pleasant place to spend an
hour in; so Wolf mounted the hill which rose behind the
parallel tracks of the railroad and the river. Here there
was a sort of terrace-road, perched high above the town
and itself overshadowed by the grassy eminence known
as “The Slopes,” beyond the summit of which lay the
wide-stretching deer-park of the lord of the manor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Feeling sure that, if the train came sooner than it was
expected, he would hear it in time, as soon as he reached
the terrace-road below “The Slopes” he began pacing to
and fro along its level security, gazing down on the lights
of the town as they twinkled intermittently through the
darkened valley beneath him. The sky was overcast; so
that these scattered points of light resembled the phantasmal
reproduction of a sidereal firmament that had
already ceased to exist. Mists that in the darkness were
only waftures of chillier air rose up from the muddy
banks of the Lunt and brought to his nostrils on this
Spring night odours that suggested the Autumn. As he
paced that terrace, inhaling these damp airs, his mind
seemed to detach itself from the realistic actualities he
was experiencing. It seemed to float off and away on a
dark stream of something that was neither air nor water.
What he desired at that moment, as he had never
desired it before, was a support in which he could lose
himself completely—lose himself without obligation or
effort! He, the mortal creation of Chance, craved for
some immortal creation of Chance, such as he could
worship, wilfully, capriciously, blindly. But he stretched
out his arms into that darkness in vain. His voice might
have been the voice of a belated rook on its way to
Babylon Hill, or the scraping of one alder-branch against
another above the waters of the Lunt, or the faint infinitesimal
slide of tiny grains of gravel, as some minute
earthworm in the midst of the empty little path at the
top of “The Slopes” came forth to inhale the Spring
night! A bubble of airy vibration, his appeal was lost
as absolutely as any single drop of water that rolled at
that moment down the green back of a frog emerging
from the cold surface of Lenty Pond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He kept visualizing the mud-scented darkness in which
he seemed to be floating as a vast banked-up aqueduct
composed of granite slabs covered with slippery black
moss. Out of the spiritual tide that carried him along,
there whirled up, in spurts of phosphorescent illumination,
various distorted physical aspects of the people he
had met these last few days. But these aspects were all
ill-assorted, incongruous, maladjusted.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. All these
morbid evocations culminated finally in the thought of
his mother; for what dispersed them and shook them
indeed into nothingness now, with an abrupt materialistic
shock, was the clear, sharp sound of the clattering gates
of the level-crossing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf slid with a jerk into the normal world as he heard
this sound, like a man falling plumb-down from a skylight
upon a creaking floor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He grasped his stick firmly by its handle, digging it
into the ground at every step, and hurried with long
strides down the little descent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Nothing in the world seemed important to him now
but to see his mother’s face and hear her high-pitched
familiar voice.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Standing on the platform, before the train drew in, he
found that his heart was beating with excitement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m simply at an <span class='it'>impasse</span>,” he thought to himself,
“about what I feel for Mother. I don’t really want her
down here .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. interfering with Gerda .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. interfering
with everything.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It’s odd .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it’s funny .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it’s
just like the spouting up of a great white whale .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
spouting up, when no one’s thinking of whales .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. when
everyone’s thinking of the course of the ship!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When the train actually came in, and he held her at
arm’s length with both his hands, clutching her wrists
almost fiercely, looking her up and down almost irritably,
he recognized in a flash that existence without her, however
adventurous it might be, would always be half-real
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just as those famous Ramsgard “Slopes” up there
had seemed half-real a few minutes ago!</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was she alone who could give the bitter-sweet tang
of reality to his phantasmal life and make the ground
under his feet firm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her coming, now, as of old, had done, at this moment,
just this very thing!</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he looked upon her now—that gallant, ruddy, handsome
face, those proud lips, those strong, white teeth, that
wavy mass of splendid, grey hair—he felt that, though
he might love other persons for other reasons, it was she
alone who made the world he lived in solid and resistant
to the touch. He felt that without her the whole thing
might split and tear—as if it had been made of thin
paper!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, it was awful, my dabchick!” the lady cried,
kissing him on both cheeks in an exaggerated foreign
manner. “They were all down on us. I never knew what
wretches tradesmen could be! They’ll be nicely fooled
when they find the house shut up. But they deserved it.
They behaved abominably.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” She caught herself up
with a gasp, and turned, full of despotic abruptness, towards
the patient Ramsgard porter. “Those are all mine!
Three big ones and three little ones! You can come back
for the other people’s when you’ve taken mine out! Is
that bus there? It always used to be.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf took from her a basket she carried, which appeared
full of the oddest assortment of objects; and
they both followed the loaded little truck, pushed by the
docile porter to the front of the station.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There it is,” cried Mrs. Solent, “the old Ramsgard
bus! Put them in .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. carefully now! Carefully now!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The porter retired, recompensed by a shilling, which
Wolf hurriedly produced from his pocket while his
mother was opening her purse. When he had helped her
into the interior of the stuffy little vehicle, he gave his
order to the man on the box.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Number Eighty-Five North Street!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where are you taking me?” Mrs. Solent asked, as
the bus rumbled off.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To a room in the town for one night, Mother. The
Lovelace was full. But I’ve got a lovely cottage for us
at King’s Barton, near Mr. Urquhart’s drive-gate.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where is this room? I remember every house in
North Street.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s at Mr. Smith’s, the hatter’s.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Solent’s dark-brown eyes glowed like the eyes of
some excited wood-animal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>That</span> man! Not <span class='it'>that</span> house, of all houses. You don’t
mean——” She broke off and stared at him intently,
while an indescribable smile began to touch the corners
of her mouth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then she leaned forward and rubbed her gloved hands
together, while her cheeks glowed with mischief.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Has the good man by any chance got a daughter
called Mattie?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>Aunt</span> Mattie?” murmured Wolf, feeling as if he were
struggling to catch two ropes, which, at the same time,
dangled before him. “That <span class='it'>is</span> what the child called her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The child?” It was his mother’s turn to look puzzled
now.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Little Olwen Smith.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Solent’s smile died away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It can’t be the same,” she said. “Unless Lorna’s child’s
got married.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s the same, all right, Mother. It’s your man, all
right. He was the hatter, wasn’t he?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She nodded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well! It’s the same, Mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her inscrutable smile began to return and she leaned
back with a sigh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To go straight to Albert’s house—— But it’ll be fun.
It’ll be sport! I’m not going to take it seriously.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Aunt Mattie? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. little Olwen? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. goodness! But
they must have come down in the world, if he lets out
rooms to visitors .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or did he invite me? Am I destined
to be Albert Smith’s guest the first night I set foot in
this place?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you and Father know him well?” enquired Wolf,
as the bus swung round the corner by the ancient conduit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your father knew Lorna well—Albert’s minx of a
wife. Lorna was even sillier about him than that idiot
Selena.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What happened, Mother?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Never mind now, Wolf! I’m in a mood to be amused
by <span class='it'>everything</span>. Don’t look so sulky! I tell you I’m going
to amuse myself here. You don’t seem to realize that I
lived in this town for ten years.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Listen, Mother,” said Wolf hurriedly, “I know what
you mean when you talk of ‘amusing’ yourself. Now look
here, Mother, I won’t have you getting into any rows
down here! I’ve got my job here; and you’ve <span class='it'>got</span> to be
nice to everybody. Do you understand?” In his excitement
he laid his heavy hand upon her knee. “You’ve got
to be nice to everybody—to everybody!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The flickering oil-lamp which lit the inside of the bus
shone down upon those shining wood-animal eyes. They
glowed with excitement. They positively gleamed as the
jolting of the vehicle jogged both mother and son up and
down on their seats.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your father taught me to be unconventional,” she said.
“And I’m not going to be all sugar-and-spice in my old
haunts.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The rambling old conveyance was drawing up now
outside Number Eighty-Five.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mother, you <span class='it'>must</span> be good, and let bygones be bygones.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She turned upon him then, while the bus-man ran up
the steps of the house to ring the bell.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your father never gave up his amusement for me, and
I’m not going to give up my amusement for you! I m
going to be just myself with all our old acquaintances.
I’m going to begin with Albert! There! Don’t be silly!
Get out and help me out. We <span class='it'>can’t</span> go anywhere else
now.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Who’s that at the door? Is <span class='it'>that</span> Lorna’s
child? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Just half-an-hour later Wolf and his mother were
seated at a massive mahogany table in the hatter’s dining-room,
sharing the Smiths’ Sunday supper. Olwen was <span class='it'>not</span>
in bed. With feverish cheeks and enormous dark eyes
she stood at the elbow of her grandfather, listening to
every word of the talk and scanning every detail of Mrs.
Solent’s appearance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I would never have believed it possible,” the grey-haired
lady was saying with radiant glances at them all,
“that you should have changed so much, Albert, and
that Lorna should have come to life in Mattie. You’re
not so pretty as your mother, my dear. Of course, we
must allow that! But goodness! You’ve got her figure
and her look. How does it feel to be so like someone
else? It must be queer—almost as if you inherited their
feelings, their troubles, everything! But I <span class='it'>am</span> glad to see
you, Mattie. It gives me—even me—a rather queer feeling.
No, you’re not as pretty as your mother; but Albert
mustn’t be hurt if I say I think you’re much nicer! You
needn’t scowl at me, Wolf. Mattie doesn’t mind, do you?
And Albert knows me too well to be surprised at <span class='it'>anything</span>
I say.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Times change, Mrs. Solent—times change!” murmured
the master of the house, in a low voice. “I was all
shaky when little Olwen said you were coming. It seemed
like the dead coming to life. But I feel all right now,
as I set eyes upon you.” And he helped himself to a
lingering sip of the glass of mild whiskey-and-water that
stood in front of him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was a sad, lean, commonplace little man, with a
deprecatory bend of the head and a mingling of rustic
cunning and weary obsequiousness in his watery, spectacled
eyes. He looked as if he had been spending the day
in long Low Church services. The smell of hassocks and
stuffy vestries hung about his clothes, and the furtive
unction of an official who had collected many threepenny
bits in an embroidered bag weighed upon his stooping
shoulders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>While Mrs. Solent ate her cold mutton and hot caper-sauce
with hungry relish and rallied the nervous churchwarden,
Wolf took the opportunity of studying in quiet
self-effacement the expressive countenance of Mr. Smith’s
daughter. Mattie turned out to be a girl with a fine figure,
but an unappealing face. She looked about twenty-five.
She was not pretty in any sense at all, in spite of what
Mrs. Solent had said. Her thick, prominent nose was out
of all proportion to the rest of her face. Her chin, her
forehead, her eyes, were all rendered insignificant by the
size of this dominant and uncomely feature.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But though Aunt Mattie’s eyes were small and of a
colour that varied between grey and green, they possessed
a certain formidable power. A person gazing into them
for the second or third time found himself looking hastily
away, as if he had been caught trespassing in a very
rigidly preserved estate.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was surprised how completely at ease the girl
showed herself. He had expected her to be extremely disconcerted
by this intrusion. But not at all. She replied
calmly and with quite the appropriate nuance of humour
to his mother’s rather exaggerated badinage; and with
himself she seemed perfectly natural and unaffected. All
this was astonishing to him; though why it should have
been so, he would have been ashamed to explain. Perhaps
he had expected the Smith family to display social tendencies
at variance with those of the upper middle-class
to which he himself belonged. If so, he was certainly
guilty of unjustifiable snobbishness. For though the hatter
of Ramsgard School did not behave like a nobleman,
he behaved with quite as much dignity and ease as most
of the professional gentlemen with whom Wolf was acquainted!
This unpremeditated supper-party in that dingy
high-ceilinged dining-room, with its great cut-glass chandelier
hanging over their heads and its gold-framed
picture of some ancestral Mr. Smith gazing down upon
them, was neither awkward nor embarrassed. Mrs.
Solent’s evident recklessness found no rocks or reefs in
the behaviour of the others upon which its mischief could
lash itself into foam!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Before the evening was over and it was time for him to
start for his night-walk back to King’s Barton, Wolf had
begged more than once for a definite promise from Mattie
Smith that she would bring Olwen over to see them when
they were established in their new abode at Lenty Cottage.
The girl was complaisant and gracious over this
invitation, to which the child responded breathlessly; but
Wolf knew enough of the ways of women to know that
there were subtle withdrawings and qualifications under
that heavy, benevolent mask, into which it would have
been unwise to probe.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Which day does the Spring Fair begin, Father?”
Mattie said suddenly to the old gentleman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The Fair, my dear?” responded the hatter. “Tomorrow,
I believe; and it lasts till the end of the week;
but someone told me after church—no! it was <span class='it'>before</span>
church—that Thursday is the horse-show.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, that completes it all!” cried Mrs. Solent. “That’s
the one last touch. <span class='it'>Don’t</span> I remember the Fair! I’d like
to go tomorrow, the moment the gates are open! I’d like
to go every day.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We’ll go on Thursday, Mother,” said Wolf. “Everyone
will be there then and you’ll be able to see how many of
’em remember you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The horse-show <span class='it'>is</span> the great day,” said Mattie Smith
acquiescingly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I haven’t changed very much, then, Albert?” murmured
Mrs. Solent in response to a furtive appraising
glance from the discreet churchwarden.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Smith looked a little embarrassed at having been
caught observing her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, you haven’t changed! You haven’t changed!”
sighed the weary little man; and the tone in which he
uttered these plaintive words seemed drawn from a vast
warehouse of accumulated school-hats—shelves upon
shelves of hats—the burden of which seemed weighing
him down in a Dead Sea of diurnal desolation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>Your</span> mother is your <span class='it'>real</span> mother, isn’t she?” interrupted
Olwen in a shrill voice, gazing at Wolf from the
protection of Mattie’s knees.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Providence came to his rescue with an answer that was
really quite an inspiration.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mothers <span class='it'>are</span> as mothers <span class='it'>do</span>,” he responded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But he caught, all the same, a reddening of Mattie’s
cheeks and a hurried turning away of the churchwarden’s
eyes. Mr. Albert Smith kept pouring out whiskey for
himself and for Wolf; but though Mrs. Solent drank only
a little coffee, she was the one who held the evening
together by her high spirits. Wolf watched Mattie whispering
to the child about going to bed; but as he knew
well enough that Olwen wouldn’t go to bed till the party
broke up, he began to look from one to another, waiting
till a lapse in the conversation should give him a chance
to bid them good-night and start on his walk home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mrs. Solent’s excitement was unsubduable; and
there seemed something about this unusual supper-party
that made him reluctant to bring it to an end. The dark
old furniture, the dark old wall-paper, the dark old great-grandfather
in his heavy frame, projected some kind of
hypnotism upon the sliding moments, that made it as
hard for him to move as if he were under a spell.</p>

<p class='pindent'>No sound came from the street outside. No sound came
from the rest of the house. Like a group of enchanted
people they continued to sit there, facing one another
across the table, listening to Mrs. Solent’s rich, voluble
voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had long begun, in his insatiable manner, to
drink up every peculiarity of the room in which they sat—of
the furniture upon which the heavily-globed gas-jets
of the candelabra shed so mellow a glow. As he grew
tired of smoking cigarettes, he became aware of a faint
scent of apples. Where this scent originated he could
not detect. It seemed to proceed equally from every portion
of the apartment. And as he gave himself up to it, it
brought to his mind a kind of distilled essence of all the
fruit and the flowers that had ever been spread out upon
that massive brown table; spread out upon former editions
of “The Western Gazette”; editions old enough to
contain news of the death of Queen Adelaide or of Queen
Charlotte!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I <span class='it'>must</span> go now,” he thought. “I <span class='it'>must</span> go now.” And
he began to suspect that what really held him back from
making a start upon his walk was not any attraction in
the Smith ménage, but simply the great invisible struggle
that had already begun between that dead man in the
cemetery and this woman who was so extraordinarily
alive!</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had come prepared to avenge herself in her own
magnificent way—not basely, but still with formidable
success. She had not come to Ramsgard to efface herself.
And now, being here, being encamped, as Miss Gault
said, on the very edge of his burying-ground, she could
not refrain, just out of pure, suppressed high spirits,
from stirring up the mud of the ambiguous past. Well!
The event must work itself out. In <span class='it'>no sense</span> was he responsible.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He did manage to rise at last and to kiss his mother
good-night. He would have kissed Olwen, too, but she
impatiently drew away. His final appeal to Mattie to
come over and see them, “any day but Thursday, when
we’ll all be at the horse-show,” was received with more
warmth and cordiality than this girl had yet displayed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What <span class='it'>were</span> the thoughts, day after day, year after year,
that beat about in the secretive brain behind that heavily-featured
face? What was this queer attraction which he
felt for her, so different from the interest excited in him
by her father and by the little girl?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf couldn’t help pondering on these things as he
made his way out of the silent town, accompanied by
hardly any mortal sound except the creak of his own
heavy boots and the thud of his own heavy stick.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was not until he was clear of the last houses of
Ramsgard, clear of both workhouse and cemetery, that the
Smith house, the Smith daughter, the Smith granddaughter,
faded from his brain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then, as the grass-scented mists grew cooler against
his face, rolling up towards the arable lands from the
hushed Blackmore meadows, the old serpent of lecherous
desire lifted once more its head in that spacious night.
Once more his mind reverted to Gerda Torp—not to
Gerda as she was when she sent her bird-call so far over
Poll’s Camp, but to Gerda as she was to his wicked
imagination when he listened to the lewd whisperings
of Lobbie Torp and Bob Weevil, to the Gerda he had
never seen and perhaps would never see—the Gerda who
used a tombstone for a hobby-horse in that littered monument-yard
in Chequers Street!</p>

<div><h1 id='chap07'>YELLOW BRACKEN</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf took good care not to reveal to his mother
his own secret reservations as to the desirability of Lenty
Cottage. But that first impression of something uncannily
neat and trim about it still obstinately persisted in his
own mind after the stir of their arrival was over.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was no word spoken about their keeping a servant;
but Mrs. Martin, the Squire’s housekeeper, promised
that their maid, Bessie, should come in two or three
times a week to clean up. But how far his mother—who,
as Wolf knew, disliked cooking—would be able to deal
with their meals, remained to be seen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>On the morning of Wednesday, after their first two
nights in their new abode, it struck Wolf that it would
be amusing, before entering on his labours with Mr.
Urquhart, to pay a visit to King’s Barton Vicarage.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found the clergyman working in his garden, and
followed him into his forlorn house, the whitewashed
exterior of which was stained with faint yellows, greens,
and browns by the varied moods of the weather. He
followed him up an uncarpeted staircase and across an
uncarpeted landing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The rooms downstairs, the doors of which stood wide
open, were evidently used as religious classrooms; for
the only furniture they contained was a miserable collection
of wooden forms and battered cane-bottom chairs.
Of the rooms at the top of the staircase, the doors of
which stood open too, one appeared to be the vicar’s
bedroom—the bed was unmade and the floor was littered
with tattered magazines—and another the priest’s sitting-room
or study.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The whole house looked as though its owner had
long since relinquished every kind of effort to get that
personal happiness out of life which is the inheritance of
the meanest. Its shabby desolation seemed to project, in
opposition to every human instinct, a forlorn emptiness
that was worse than squalor. Its effect upon Wolf’s senses
was ghastly. No one could conceive a return to such
a house as a return “home”! What it meant was simply
that this wretched little priest <span class='it'>had no home</span>. The basic
human necessity for some degree of cheerfulness in one’s
lair was outraged and violated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The room into which Wolf was now led had at least the
redemption of a small fire of red coals. But except for
this, it was not a place where a stranger would wish to
prolong his stay. It was littered from end to end with
cheap novels. Chairs, tables, and even the floor, were
piled up with these vulgarly-bound volumes. The vaporous
March light filtering in through dingy muslin curtains
threw a watery pallor upon these abortions of
human mediocrity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You seem to be fond of reading,” remarked Wolf to
his host, as he sat down on the only chair that was not in
use.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mostly stories,” responded T. E. Valley, turning his
head round with a whimsical grimace, as he fumbled
at the lock of a small cupboard hanging against the wall.
“Mostly stories,” he repeated. Having cleared a chair
and the fragment of a table, he sat down opposite his
guest with a bottle of brandy between them and two
glasses.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>You</span>, are not unhappy, then,” remarked Wolf, trying
to overcome his discomfort. “Books and brandy .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and
a fire for chilly days.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You might be much worse
off than you are, Vicar .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. much worse off.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>T. E. Valley smiled wanly. “Much worse off,” he repeated,
refilling his glass. “But you know those stories
are hardly literature, Solent—hardly theology, Solent.
It <span class='it'>is</span> curious,” he went on, meditatively, resting his chin
upon his clenched hands and supporting his elbows on
the table. “It <span class='it'>is</span> curious that with Urquhart and Jason
Otter always working against me, and with most of the
parish despising me, I am not more often in despair.
Especially as I have so poor a conceit of myself. I know
myself through and through, Solent; and I am the
weakest, feeblest character alive! And yet, as you say, I
really am not, <span class='it'>not at bottom, I mean</span>, an unhappy person.
It is curious. I can’t understand it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was silent for a space; while Wolf found himself
giving way to a strange, almost sensual spasm of nervous
sympathy. There was something about the man’s abject
humility that excited him in a way he could not have
explained.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It doesn’t matter what T. E. Valley does,” he began
again, his voice rising to a shrill squeal, like the voice
of a prophet among mice. “It doesn’t matter whether I
drink or whether I stay sober! The blessed Sacrament
remains the same, whatever happens to T. E. Valley!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf looked at him and exulted in the man’s exultation.
“He’s got hold of it,” he thought, “whatever he
likes to call it. He’s got hold of it. This awful house
might be a prison, an asylum, a slave-galley. The fellow’s
a saint! He’s got hold of it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But it was his practical reason rather than his nervous
sympathy that dictated his next words. “You don’t worry
yourself about conduct, then, or about duty?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little man’s disordered El Greco eyes grew bright
within their hollow sockets. “Not a bit!” he cried. “Not
a bit!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And morality?” enquired Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a pause at this; and the light in those animated
eyes went out suddenly, just as if Wolf had put an
extinguisher over them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You mean the matter of unholy love,” murmured
T. E. Valley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If you call it so,” said Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That <span class='it'>is</span> another question,” the man admitted, and he
gave vent to a sigh of infinite sadness. “Why it should be
so, it’s hard to tell; but every kind of love, even the most
insane and depraved—even incest, for instance—is connected
with religion and touches religion. When I get
drunk it’s a matter of chemistry. When I get angry it’s a
matter of nerves. But when I love <span class='it'>in the wrong way</span>——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The priest of King’s Barton rose to his feet. With a
shaky hand he deliberately poured back into the decanter
his unfinished drink. Then, with awkward shuffling steps,
steps that made Wolf aware for the first time that instead
of boots he wore large, ragged, leather slippers, he
came round the table to his guest’s side.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m nothing,” he mumbled almost incoherently. “I’m
nothing. But don’t you know,” he said, seizing Wolf’s
hand in his dirty, feverish fingers, “don’t you know that
love sinks down into the roots of the whole world? Don’t
you know that there are .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. levels .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in life .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
that .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. defy Nature?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s brain became suddenly clearer than it had been
all day since he first got out of bed that morning. It
seemed to him that between this confessed “morality” of
Tilly-Valley and what he had already divined as the unconfessed
“immorality” of Mr. Urquhart, there was a
ghastly reciprocity. He suddenly felt a reaction in favour
of the most simple earth-born heathenism. He deliberately
finished his glass of brandy, and stood up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t think any of us knows very much about love,”
he mumbled. And then he went on rather lamely: “I
think there are a great many different kinds of love, just
as there are a great many different kinds of malice.” He
stopped again, his mind struggling with the difficulty of
expression. “I don’t think,” he blurted out, “that most
of the kinds of love we run across sink down to the bottom
of the universe!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Having said this, he uttered a short, uncomfortable
schoolboy-chuckle. “Well, well,” he added gently, “I’m
not so certain about any of this as to be rude to anyone
over it! Well, good-bye, Valley,” and he held out his
hand. “By the by, my mother will expect a call from
you soon. You <span class='it'>will</span> come, won’t you? Drop in at tea-time.
I’m generally in then; only don’t let it be tomorrow, because
we’re going to the Show. Shall we see you there?”
And he shook the priest’s hand with affectionate cordiality,
searching his mind with his eyes.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was just lunch-time when he returned to Lenty Cottage.
His mother had been weeding in the garden all the
morning; and she brought into the small front-room,
where they had their light meal, a breath of earth-mould
that was very acceptable after his recent conversation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You look very well pleased with yourself, Wolf,” she
said, as they sat down opposite each other. “What have
you been doing to make you feel so complacent?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Acting as oil and wine, Mother,” he answered, “between
the squire and the vicar.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She threw back her head and laughed wickedly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re a nice one to settle quarrels! But I suppose
you settled this one by shouting them both down, and
that’s what’s given your dear face—as grandmamma used
to say—that ‘beyond yourself’ look! There’s a letter for
you under that book; but you shan’t have it till I’ve finished
this good meal and drunk my coffee.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf looked at the book in question, which was a
large edition of Young’s “Night Thoughts” bound like a
school-prize.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s a child’s hand,” said his mother, watching his
face with gleaming brown eyes. “Is it from that little
Smith girl, do you think? Or have those people you
stayed with, those funny Otter people, got any children?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf shook his head. Could it be from Olwen Smith?
It appeared unlikely; but the child did seem to have
taken a fancy to him. It was possible. But then, in one
of those sudden clairvoyances that emanate so strangely
from unopened letters, he felt certain that it wasn’t from
a child at all. It was from Gerda!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re mad to read it, Wolf, I can see that. But I
won’t have my good lunch spoilt. I think it would be nice
if we had our coffee at once, don’t you? <span class='it'>Do</span> go and bring
it in! It’s on the kitchen-stove.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He obeyed with alacrity, as he always did in these
caprices of his mother’s, and they sipped their coffee in
suspended excitement, their eyes shining across the table
like the eyes of two animals.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, it’ll be so amusing, going to the Horse Show,”
she cried. “I wonder how many of them I shall recognize?
Albert used to be ever so embarrassed when I
made a fuss over him in public. And I did, you know, I
often did; just to show I didn’t care a fig about Lorna’s
silliness!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Obscurely irritated by the flippancy of this allusion to
his father’s misconduct, and definitely impatient at the
enforced delay about the letter, Wolf suddenly burst out:
“I’ve been to tea with Selena Gault, Mother. She wrote
and invited me.” He did not say that he had been the
first to take the initiative in this affair. He felt it to be
revenge enough without that. But Mrs. Solent was a
match for him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I’m so glad, Wolf, that you went to cheer up that
old monster. That <span class='it'>was</span> sweet of you! Think of it! My
son sitting down to tea with all the Ramsgard old ladies!
I’m sure she invited every one of the masters’ wives and
mothers to meet you. ‘The son of my old friend, William
Solent.’ I can hear her say it! Well—do tell me, Wolf!
For this is really getting interesting. What <span class='it'>did</span> you think
of the great Gault? Of course, you know how it is with
me. I never <span class='it'>can</span> endure deformity! I feel sorry and so
forth; but I just can’t see it about. It was over the Gault
that your father and I had our final quarrel. No, you
<span class='it'>must</span> listen to me! He was as insensitive about things
like that as in everything else. He had absolutely no
fastidiousness. The Gault had never before met any man
who could even look at her. I mean—you know!—look at
her as men <span class='it'>do</span> look at us. And it just went to her poor,
dear head. She fell madly in love—if you can call it
love, in a monster like that—and the extraordinary thing
about it was that it didn’t horrify your father. I don’t
want to be catty; but really—you know!—with a deformity
like that—— You’d have thought he’d have run to the
end of the world. But not at all! What are you doing,
Wolf? Take your hands from your head!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf, with his long, bony middle fingers pressed
against his ears, contented himself with making a shameless
grimace at the woman who had given him birth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Quick as lightning Mrs. Solent ran to the side-table,
and snatching up the letter that was beneath the book,
made as though she would throw it in the fire.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This manœuvre was entirely successful. Her son rushed
upon her; and the half-playful, half-serious struggle that
ensued between them ended in his wresting the letter out
of her clenched fingers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He then pushed her down by main force into an armchair
and hurriedly handed her a cigarette and a lighted
match.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now <span class='it'>please</span> be good, Mother darling!” he pleaded.
“I’ll tell you everything when I’ve read it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He sat down in the opposite chair and tore open the
letter. His mother puffed great rings of smoke into the
air between them and surveyed him with glittering eyes—with
eyes that had in their brown depths an almost
maudlin passion of affection.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Selena Gault was forgotten.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The letter was written in pencil and in a handwriting
as straggling and unformed as that of a little girl of
ten. “Olwen would have composed a much more
grown-up production,” he thought, as he read the following
words:</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='noindent'><span class='sc'>My dear Mr. Solent</span>:</p>

<p class='pindent'>I am going out water-rat hunting with a basket for marigolds
and to see if there are any moor-hens down there. I’m going to
start directly after dinner with Lob and go down stream just like
we did before. Miss Malakite wants us to have tea with her
about five. So do come there if you can’t come to the Lunt.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This is from your little friend, Gerda.</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>“It <span class='it'>is</span> from a child,” he said as casually as he could,
stepping up to his mother’s side and waving the letter in
front of her. He felt a tremendous reluctance to let her
read it; and yet, being the woman she was, he dared not
put it straight into his pocket. Nothing of this was hidden
from Mrs. Solent; but she had had her little victory in
the matter of Miss Gault, and she was in a mood to be
indulgent now.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right, Wolf, put it into your pocket. I don’t want
to see it. I expect you’ll find much nicer barmaids in
Blacksod than you ever did in Hammersmith. I won’t
interfere with your light-o’-loves. I never <span class='it'>have</span>, have I?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, you never have, Mother darling,” he responded,
with a rush of affection born of immense relief. And
slipping Gerda’s note into his coat-pocket, he leaned forward
and took her handsome, ruddy face between the
palms of his hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But I’m off, now, my treasure; and don’t expect me
back till late tonight!” He hesitated for a moment, and
then added: “You’d better not stay awake; though I
know you <span class='it'>will</span>; but I shall be coming home with the
Otters, and I’ll let myself in quietly.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He kissed her quickly and placed both his hands for a
moment upon the rough mass of her grey hair. She
smiled back at him gaily enough, but he wondered if
that little sound he seemed conscious of in the cavity of
her strong throat was an evidence of some other emotion.
If it was, she swallowed it as completely and effectively
as if it had been a little silver minnow swallowed
by a watchful pike.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I shall just go to bed, then, and read in bed,” she
cried jestingly, when he let her go. “I’m in the middle
of a thrilling story about a young man who has every
vice there is! I’m sure he’s got <span class='it'>some</span> vices that even
Selena Gault’s never heard of. I’ll go on with that; and
if I want a little variety, I’ll read the book Cousin Carfax
gave me about Chinese Rugs; and if <span class='it'>that</span> doesn’t satisfy
me, I’ll read Casanova’s Memoirs. No, I won’t! I’ll
read Canon Pusey’s Sermons or something of that sort
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. something that just rambles on and isn’t modern
or clever! So run off, and don’t worry about me. By the
way, I had my first caller this morning, when you were
over at the Manor.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who was that, Mother?” enquired Wolf, flicking his
stick against his boot and thinking of the tombstone in
Mr. Torp’s yard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mrs. Otter!” she cried gaily. “And I believe we’ll get
on splendidly. She told me how fond you and her son
Jason were of each other.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jason?” muttered Wolf. “Well, take care of yourself,
darling! Don’t work too hard in the garden. Remember
tomorrow!” And he opened the door hastily and let himself
out. “Jason?” he muttered once more, as he strode
down Lenty Lane.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His walk to Blacksod that early afternoon was one
long orgy of amorous evocations. He skirted the town in
such an absorbed trance that he found himself in the
river-meadow before he realized that he’d left the streets
behind. Nothing could have been more congruous with
his mood that afternoon than this slow following of the
waters of the Lunt! Past poplars and willows, past
muddy ditches and wooden dams, past deserted cow-sheds
and old decrepit barges half-drowned in water, past tall
hedges of white-flowering blackthorn, past low thick
hedges of scarcely budded hawthorn, past stupid large-bodied
cattle with shiny red hides and enormous horns,
past tender, melancholy cattle with liquid eyes and silky
brown-and-white flanks, he made his way through those
pleasant pastures.</p>

<p class='pindent'>So beautiful was the relaxed Spring atmosphere, that
by degrees the excitement of his sensuality ebbed a little;
and the magic of Nature became of equal importance
with the thrill of amorous pursuit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Though the sky was overcast, it was overcast with such
a heavenly “congregation of vapours” that Wolf would
not have had it otherwise. There were filmy clouds floating
there that seemed to be drifting like the scattered
feathers of enormous albatrosses in a pearl-white sea;
and behind these feathery travellers was the milky ocean
on which they floated. But even that was not all; for the
very ocean seemed broken here and there into hollow
spaces, ethereal gulfs in the fleecy whiteness; and through
these gulfs was visible a pale yellowish mist, as if the
universal air were reflecting millions of primrose-buds!
Nor was even this vaporous luminosity the final revelation
of those veiled heavens. Like the entrance to some
great highway of the ether, whose air-spun pavement was
not the colour of dust, but the colour of turquoise, there,
at one single point above the horizon, the vast blue sky
showed through. Transcending both the filmy whiteness
and the vaporous yellowness, hovering there above the
marshes of Sedgemoor, this celestial Toll-Pike of the
Infinite seemed to Wolf, as he walked towards it, like
some entrance into an unknown dimension, into which
it was not impossible to pass! Though in reality it was
the background of all the clouds that surrounded it, it
seemed in some mysterious way nearer than they were.
It seemed like a harbour into which the very waters of the
Lunt might flow. That incredible patch of blue seemed
something into which he could plunge his hands and
draw them forth again, filled like overflowing cups with
the very ichor of happiness. Ah! That was the word. It
was <span class='it'>pure happiness</span>, that blue patch! It was the very
thing he had tried so clumsily to explain to that poor
Tilly-Valley, that both he and Mr. Urquhart so woefully
lacked! And this was the thing, he thought, as he walked
slowly on through the green, damp grass, after which his
whole life was one obstinate quest. Ay! Where did it
grow, this happiness? Where did it bubble up free and
unspoiled? Not, at any rate, in such “love”—half sex,
half reaction from sex—that these two disordered people
were pursuing!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not in asceticism, nor in vice! Where then? He began
to stride forward with all his mind and all his soul fixed
on that blue patch over Sedgemoor. Not in any human
struggle of that kind! Rather in some large, free, unrestricted
recognition of something actually in Nature,
something that came and went, something that the mind
could evoke, something that required nothing save earth
and sky for its fulfilment!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Between himself and that blue patch there stretched
now the great trunk of a bending willow, covered, as if
by a liquid green mist, with its countless newly-budded
twigs. The trunk seemed attracted down to the waters of
the Lunt; and the waters of the Lunt seemed to rise a
little, as they flowed on, in reciprocal attraction. And
through the green buds of this bending trunk the patch
of blue looked closer than ever. It was not any opening
highway, not any ethereal road, as he had imagined at
first. It was actually a pool of unfathomable blue water;
a pool in space! As he looked at it now, those green
willow-buds became living moss around its blue edge;
and a great yellowish fragment of sky that leaned towards
it became a tawny-skinned centaur, who, bending
down his human head from his animal body, quenched
his thirst in its purity. A yellow man-beast drinking
draughts of blue water!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf stopped dead-still and gazed at what he saw, as
ever more nearly and more nearly what he saw became
what he imagined. This was what he wanted! This was
what he sought! The brown earth was that tawny-skinned
centaur; and the reason why the world was all so green
about him was because all living souls—the souls of
grass-blades and tree-roots and river-reeds—shared, after
their kind, in the drinking up of that blue immensity by
the great mouth of clay!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved on now again and slowly passed the bent
tree. His thoughts relaxed and grew limp after his moment
of ecstasy; but such as they were, like languid-winged
herons, they flapped heavily over the dykes and
ditches of his life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt obstinately glad that through all those detestable
London years—the weight of which, like chains
that are thrown away, he had never realized till they
were over—he had just ploughed through his work at
that college, his head bent, his shoulders hunched, his
spirit concentrated, stoical, unyielding! What had it
been in him that had kept him, for twelve heavy years,
stubbornly at work on all that unbelievable drudgery?
What had it been in him that had saved him from love-affairs,
from marriage—that had made it horrible for
him to satisfy his sexual instincts with casual light-o’-loves
from tap-rooms and music-halls? What had it
been? He looked at a great alder-root that curved snakelike
over the brown mud beneath the bank; and in the
tenacious flexibility of that smooth phallic serpent of
vegetation he seemed to detect an image of his own secretive
life, craftily forcing its way forward, through a
thousand obstacles, towards the liberation which it
craved.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And what was this liberation?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Happiness! But not <span class='it'>any</span> kind of happiness; not just
the happiness of making love to Gerda Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked closely at the manner in which the alder-root
dipped so adroitly and yet so naturally into the
river. Yes! It was a kind of ecstasy he aimed at; the
kind that loses itself, that merges itself; the kind that
demands nothing in return!</p>

<p class='pindent'>How could this ecstasy be called love? It was more
than love. It was the coming to the surface of something
unutterable.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then, like an automatic wheel that revolved in his
brain, a wheel from one of whose spokes hung a bodiless
human head, his thoughts brought him back to that Living
Despair on the Waterloo steps. And he recalled what
Jason Otter had said about pity: how if you had pity
and there was one miserable consciousness left in the
universe, you had no right to be happy. Oh, that was a
wicked thought! You had, on the contrary, a desperately
punctilious reason to be happy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That face upon the Waterloo steps <span class='it'>gave</span> you your happiness.
It was the only gift it could give. Between your
happiness and that face there was an umbilical cord. All
suffering was a martyr’s suffering, all happiness was a
martyr’s happiness, when once you got a glimpse of that
cord! It was the existence in the world of those two gross
vulgar parodies of life, <span class='it'>ennui</span> and <span class='it'>pleasure</span>, that confused
the issues, that blighted the distinctions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For about half a mile he walked steadily forward,
letting the violence of this last thought be smoothed
away by the feel of the damp soil under his feet, and the
cool touch, imperceptible in detail, through his leather
boots—of all the anonymous weeds and grasses that
were beginning to feel the release of Spring.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ah, there they were!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He came upon them quite suddenly, as he clambered
over a wooden paling between the end of a thickset
hedge and the river-bank, the wooden boards of which,
worm-eaten and grey with lichen, jutted out over the
water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were seated side by side on a fallen elm-tree, arranging
the contents of a great wicker-basket that lay
on the ground between them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hullo!” cried Lob, jumping to his feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf took the boy in his arms and began a sort of
genial horse-play with him, tumbling him over in the
grass and holding him down by force as he kicked and
struggled. But Lob soon wearied of this, and, lying
quietly under the man’s hands, turned his mud-flicked,
grass-stained face towards his sister.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You see I be right, Sis! So hand over thik ninepence.
He <span class='it'>be</span> come, same as I said ’a would. So hand over what
I’ve won!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf became aware that a fit of sudden shyness had
fallen upon both himself and Gerda. He continued to
kneel above the prostrate Lob, pinioning the child’s arms
and putting off the moment when he must rise and face
her. Gerda, too, seemed to prolong with unnecessary
punctiliousness her fumbling with the ragged recesses
of her faded little purse, as she emptied pennies and bits
of silver into her lap.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ninepence! It was ninepence!” the boy kept shouting,
as he sought in vain to lift up his eager grass-stained
face high enough to see what the girl was doing: “It was
sixpence if he went to Malakite’s! It was ninepence if he
came here!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf, bending over his prisoner, found himself watching
the progress of a minute ladybird who with infinite
precaution was climbing the bent stalk of a small grass-blade
close to the boy’s head. But he was so conscious of
Gerda’s presence that a slow, sweet, shivering sensation
ran through his nerves, as if in the midst of a great heat
his body had been plunged into the cool air of a cavern.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There, Lob!” said Gerda suddenly, holding out sixpence
and three pennies.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf let the child go and stood up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Their eyes met through the boy’s violent scramble and
snatching clutch. They met through his cry of “Finding’s
keepings, losing’s seekings! Bet me enough to make a
shilling! I be a prime grand better, <span class='it'>I</span> be!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And, as their eyes met, the shyness that they had felt
before changed into a thrilling solemnity. For one quick
moment they held each other’s gaze; and it was as if they
had been overtaken simultaneously by an awe-struck
recognition of some great unknown Immortal, who had
suddenly appeared between them, with a hand upon each.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then the girl turned to her brother.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I bet you, Lob,” she said, “you won’t find a blackbird’s
nest round here with eggs in it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How much?” the boy responded, standing in front
of her with his hands behind his head, in the pose of a
young, indolent conqueror.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How much!—how much!” mocked Wolf, with heavy
humour, seating himself on the tree-trunk by Gerda’s
side. “What a young miser we are!” As he took his place
by her side, the floating barge upon which it seemed to
him they were embarked rocked with a motion that gave
him a sense of sweet dizziness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lob looked at his sister gravely, weighing the matter
in his mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You won’t hunt rats with <span class='it'>him</span> when I’m not there?”
he bargained.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She shook her head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tis early for them nesties; but I do know for three
o’n already; up along Babylon Hill. They be all hipsy-hor
hedges, looks-like, in <span class='it'>this</span> here field; and blackbirds
be fonder o’ holly-trees and bramble-bushes. But they
bain’t so sly, the bloody old yellow-beaks, as them
thrushes be. I think I’ll do it, Sis.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think I may take her bond,” muttered Wolf under
his breath.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I haven’t heard one of them since we came,” said
Gerda cunningly. “They like the hills better than down
here on the flat. I wouldn’t have betted so much if I
wasn’t sure I’d win.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>I</span> ain’t betted nothink,” said Lob quickly, “so you
can’t win anyways. It’s either us both loses, or it’s me
what wins.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda nodded assent to this unchivalrous issue.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I may as well have a look round,” decided the
boy; “only mind—no tricks! If you rat-hunt with <span class='it'>him</span>
when I ain’t there, ’twill be threepence whatsoever.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She indicated assent to this also.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lob began to swagger slowly away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I knows why you wants me to shog off,” he called
back; and he added an outrageous expression in shrewd
Dorset dialect which had the effect of bringing an angry
flush to Gerda’s cheeks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Be off, you rogue,” cried Wolf, “or you’ll get more
than you’ve bargained for!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But there came flying through the air, from the child’s
impudent hand, a well-aimed puffball, which burst as it
touched Gerda’s knee, covering her dress with a thin,
powdery brown dust.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Neither she nor Wolf moved a muscle in response to
this attack; and Lobbie wandered slowly off till he was
lost to sight. Then the girl got up and began shaking her
skirt. The cream-coloured cloak hung loose and open,
and Wolf saw that she was dressed in an old, tight-fitting,
olive-green frock.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When she had finished brushing the puffball-powder
from her clothes, she took off her hat and laid it carefully,
absent-mindedly, upon the tree-trunk by his side.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He instantaneously threw his arms round her and
held her lightly against him, while in the silence between
them he felt his heart beating like an invisible
underground water-pump.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But she unloosed his hands with deft, cool fingers. “Not
now,” she said. “Let’s talk now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In some mysterious way he was grateful to her for
this. The last thing he wanted was to spoil the strange,
lovely solemnity that had fallen upon them like the
falling of slow, thin, noiseless rain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rose and took her hand, and they began moving
away from the log.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wait! I’ll leave a signal for that little rascal,” he
said, putting his stick and his cloth-cap by the side of
the cream-coloured hat. But he did not give up her hand;
and together they walked carelessly and aimlessly across
that wide field, taking a course at right angles to the
course taken by her brother. Wolf had hitherto, in his
attitude to the girls he had approached, been dominated
by an impersonal lust; but what he now felt stealing
over him like a sweet, insidious essence, was the actual,
inmost identity of this young human animal. And the
strange thing was that this conscious presence, this deep-breathing
Gerda, moving silently beside him under her
cloak, under her olive-green frock, under everything she
wore, was not just a girl, not just a white, flexible body,
with lovely breasts, slender hips, and a gallant swinging
stride, but a living conscious soul, different in its entire
being from his own identity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What he felt at that moment was that, hovering in
some way around this tangible form, was another form,
impalpable and delicate, thrilling him with a kind of
mystical awe. It changed everything around him, this
new mysterious being at his side, whose physical loveliness
was only its outward sheath! It added something to
every tiniest detail of that enchanted walk which they
took together now over one green field after another.
The little earth-thrown mole-hills were different. The
reddish leaves of the newly-sprung sorrel were different.
The droppings of the cattle, the clumps of dark-green
meadow-rushes, all were different! And something in
the cold, low-hung clouds themselves seemed to conspire,
like a great stretched-out grey wing, to separate Gerda
and himself from the peering intrusion of the outer
world.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And if the greyness above and the greenness beneath
enhanced his consciousness of the virginal beauty of the
girl, her own nature at that hour seemed to gather into
itself all that most resembled it in that Spring twilight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gate after gate leading from one darkening field into
another they opened and passed through, walking unconsciously
westward, towards the vast yellowish bank
of clouds that had swallowed up that sky-road into space.
It was so far only the beginning of twilight, but the undried
rains that hung still in motionless water-drops upon
millions of grass-blades seemed to welcome the coming
on of night—seemed to render the whole surface of the
earth less opaque.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Over this cold surface they moved hand in hand, between
the unfallen mist of rain in the sky and the diffused
mist of rain in the grass, until the man began to
feel that they two were left alone alive, of all the people
of the earth—that they two, careless of past and future,
protected from the very ghosts of the dead by these tutelary
vapours, were moving forward, themselves like
ghosts, to some vague imponderable sanctuary where
none could disturb or trouble them!</p>

<p class='pindent'>They had advanced for more than a mile in this enchanted
mood, and were leaning against a wooden gate
which they had just shut behind them, when Wolf pointed
to an open shed, about a stone’s throw away, the floor of
which he could make out, from where they stood, to be
strewn with a carpet of yellow bracken.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shall we try <span class='it'>that</span> as a shelter?” he asked. The words
were simple enough. But Gerda detected in them the old,
equivocal challenge of the male pursuer; and as he
pulled at her wrist, trying to lead her towards the shed,
she stiffened her body, snatched her hand away, and
drew back against the protective bars of the gate. Very
quickly then, so as to smooth away any hurt to his pride,
she began to speak; and since silence rather than words
had hitherto been the link between them, the mere utterance
of any speech from her at all was a shock strong
enough to quell his impetuousness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you like me directly you saw me, that day in our
house?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked at her attentively, as, with her fair head
bare and her arms spread out along the top bar of the
gate, she asked this naïve question.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It suddenly came over him that she had not really the
remotest conception as to how rare her beauty was. She
regarded herself, of course, as a “pretty” girl, but she
had no notion that she moved through Blacksod like one
of those women of antiquity about whose loveliness the
noblest legends of the world were made! A certain vein
of predatory roguery in him led him to play up to this
simplicity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I liked you best when you were whistling to me,” he
said. But in his senses he thought: “I should be a madman
not to snatch at her!” And in his soul he thought: “I shall
marry her. As sure as tomorrow follows today, I shall
marry her!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I liked <span class='it'>you</span> best when you were hunting for me at
Poll’s Camp,” said Gerda. “But I can’t understand——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What can’t you understand, Gerda?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t understand why I don’t want you to touch me
just now. But oh! if you only knew what things they say
in the town about girls and men!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She looked him straight in the face with an ambiguous
tilt of her soft, rounded chin. Something had come between
them—something that troubled him seriously,
though not with the sense of any unscalable barrier.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What things do they say in the town?” he asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At this she clapped her hands to her cheeks, and a look
of troubled bewilderment crossed her fixed gaze.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He began to wonder if the girl, for all her coquetries,
was not abnormally innocent. Perhaps the extreme lewdness
of lads like Bob Weevil had, in some of those furtive
conclaves between young people that are always so complete
a mystery to older persons, given her some kind of
startled shock.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Slowly her hands fell to her sides, and the troubled
look faded; but she still faced him with a faint, tremulous
frown, while the delicate curves about her eyes
took on that expression of monumental beseeching, such
as one sees sometimes in antique marbles.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His craving to take her in his arms was checked by a
wave of overpowering tenderness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As she stood there, with her back to the gate, her personality
struck home to him with such a sharp, sudden
pang of reality, that it made certain tiny little blossoms
of the blackthorn-hedge become strangely important, as
if they had been an apparition of wonderful white
swans.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, never mind what they say in the town! You
and I are by ourselves now. It’s only you and I that count
today. And I won’t tease you, Gerda, you darling—no,
not with one least thing you don’t like!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was silent, and they remained motionless, staring
at each other like two stone pillars bearing the solemn
weight of the unknown future. Then he possessed himself
of one of her hands, and it was a new shock to him to feel
how ice-cold her fingers had grown.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t act as if we’re strangers, Gerda!” he pleaded.
“I do understand you—much more than you think I do.
And I’ll take care of you for ever! It isn’t as if time
mattered one bit. I feel as if I’d known you all my life.
I feel as if everything here”—and he glanced round at
those strangely important white blossoms—“were an old
story already. It’s funny, Gerda, isn’t it, how natural and
yet how weird it is, that we should have met at all? Only
a week ago I was in London, with no remotest idea
that you were in the world—or this gate, or this blackthorn-hedge,
or that shed over there!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her cold fingers did respond a little to his pressure
now, and her eyes fell and searched the ground at her
feet. Without a sigh, without a breath, she pondered,
floating upon some inner sea of feeling, of which no one,
not even herself, would ever know the depths.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You <span class='it'>are</span> glad we’ve met, Gerda, dear?” he asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She raised her eyes. They had the tension of a sudden,
difficult resolution in them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do men ever leave girls alone after they’ve married
them?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The words were so unexpected that he could only press
her cold fingers and glance away from those troubled
eyes. What his own gaze encountered was a single tarnished
celandine, whose bent stalk lay almost flat on a
wisp of rain-sodden grass.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“When we’re married,” he responded gravely, after a
pause, during which he felt as if with his own hands he
were launching a rigged ship into a misty sea, “I’ll leave
you alone just as much as you want!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A girl I know said once that my whistling was only
whistling for a lover. <span class='it'>You</span> don’t think that, do you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good God! I should think not! Your whistling’s a
wonderful thing. It’s your genius. It’s your way of expressing
what we all want to express.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do we all want to express?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He chuckled right out at this, and, forgetting all vows
and pledges, flung his arms round her shoulders and
hugged her tightly to his heart. “Oh, Gerda, Gerda!” he
cried breathlessly, as he let her go, “you’ll be soon making
me so damnably fond of you, that I’ll be completely
at your mercy!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But what do we all want to express?” she repeated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt such a rush of happiness at the change in her
voice that he could only answer at random.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“God! my dear, <span class='it'>I</span> don’t know! Recognition, I suppose.
No! not exactly that! Gratitude, perhaps. But that’s not
quite it. You’ve asked a hard question, sweetheart, and
I’m damned if I can give you the answer.” He drew her
towards him as he spoke, and this time she seemed to
yield herself as she had never done before. But the
warmth of her body, as he pressed it to him, dissolved
his tender consideration so quickly that once more she
drew back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hurriedly anxious to rush in between her thoughts and
herself, he began saying the first thing that came into
his head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think what we all want to express is .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. something
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. addressed .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to the gods .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. some kind
of .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. acknowledgement——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stopped abruptly; for she had once more fixed
upon him that wild, bewildered look.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re not angry with me, Gerda, darling?” he
blurted out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She did not take any notice of these words of his, but
the look he dreaded began to fade away under the genuine
concern of his tone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She now pulled her cream-coloured cloak tightly
across her olive-green frock; and instead of relinquishing
the garment when she’d done this, she kept her arms
crossed against her breast, holding the gathered folds of
the woollen stuff. Then her lips moved, and, looking
away from him, sideways, over the wide field, she said
very quietly:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If you feel it’s no good, and you couldn’t think of
marrying a girl like me, you’d better let me go home
now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He never forgot the solemn fatality she put into those
words; and he answered in the only way he could. He
took her head gently between his hands and kissed her
upon the forehead. This action, in its grave tenderness
and its freedom from any fever of the blood, did seem to
reassure her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the attraction of her sweetness soon excited his
senses again and he began caressing her in spite of
himself. She did not resist him any more; but the reaction
from the former tenseness of her nerves broke
down her self-control, and he soon became aware of the
salt taste of tears upon his lips. She did not cry aloud.
She cried silently; but the sobs that shook her showed,
in the very power they had over her, the richness and
vitality of her youthful blood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The fact that he had launched his boat and hoisted his
sail—the fact that he had already resolved to marry her,
come what might—was something that in itself dispelled
his scruples.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s cold here,” he murmured, when at last she had
lifted up her tear-stained face and they had exchanged
some long kisses; “it’s cold here, Gerda, darling. Lets
just <span class='it'>see</span> what that shed over there’s like! We needn’t stay
a minute there if it’s not a nice sort of place.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A species of deep, lethargic numbness to everything
except the immediate suggestions of his voice and touch
seemed to have taken possession of her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His arm round her, her cream-coloured cloak hanging
loose, her cheeks pale, she let herself be led across the
intervening tract of grass to the open door of the little
shed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Before they reached it, however, she turned her face
round and glanced shyly at him. “You know I’m quite
stupid and ignorant,” she said. “I know nothing about
anything.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf did not pause to enquire whether this hurried
confession referred to what might be named “the ritual
of love” or just simply to her lack of book-learning. His
senses were by this time in such a whirl of excitement
that the girl’s clear-toned voice sounded like the vague
humming of a sea-shell in his ears.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gerda?” he murmured huskily, with a faint, a very
faint interrogation in his tone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Emotions, feelings, desires, some exalted, some brutal,
whirled up from the bottom of his nature, like stormdriven
eels roused and stirred from the ooze of a muddy
river!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Together they stood at the entrance to that little shed
and surveyed the interior in a silence that was like the
hovering of some great falcon of fate, suspended between
past and future. The place was an empty cow-barn, its
roof thatched with river-reeds and its floor thickly strewn
with a clean, dry bed of last Autumn’s yellow bracken.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The queer thing was that as he drew her across that
threshold his conscious soul seemed to slip out of his
body and to watch them both from the high upper air as
if it were itself that falcon of fate. But when, with their
feet upon that bracken-floor, they faced each other, there
suddenly floated into Wolf’s mind, like the fluttering of a
whirling leaf upon disturbed water, an old Dorset ditty
that he had read somewhere, with a refrain about
Shaftesbury-town.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know nothing about anything,” repeated the girl
in a low voice; but as he held her tightly against his
beating heart, it was not her words but the words of that
old song which hummed through his brain.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>There’ll be yellow bracken beneath your head;</p>
<p class='line0'>There’ll be yellow bracken about your feet.</p>
<p class='line0'>For the lass Long Thomas lays in’s bed</p>
<p class='line0'>Will have no blanket, will have no sheet.</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
</div>
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>My mother has sheets of linen white,</p>
<p class='line0'>My father has blankets of purple dye.</p>
<p class='line0'>But to my true-love have I come tonight</p>
<p class='line0'>And in yellow bracken I’ll surely lie:</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
</div>
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>In the yellow bracken he laid her down,</p>
<p class='line0'>While the wind blew shrill and the river ran;</p>
<p class='line0'>And never again she saw Shaftesbury-town,</p>
<p class='line0'>Whom Long Thomas had taken for his leman!</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>The smell of the bracken rose up from that bed and
took the words of this old song and turned them into the
wild beating of the very pulse of love.</p>

<p class='pindent'>To the end of his days he associated that moment with
these dried-up aromatic leaves and with that remembered
rhyme. The sweetness of his paramour, her courage, her
confiding trust, her “fatal passivity,” were blended with
the fragrance of those withered ferns and with that old
ballad.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Meanwhile the chilly March airs floated in and out of
the bare shed where they were lying; and the shades of
twilight grew deeper and deeper. Those twilight shades,
as they settled down about their heads, became like veritable
sentinels of love—wraith-like, reverential, patient.
They seemed to be holding back the day, so that it should
not peer into their faces. They seemed to be holding back
the darkness, so that it should not separate them, the
one from the other!</p>

<p class='pindent'>And as they lay—happy and oblivious at last—just as
if they were really lying on the deck of some full-sailed
ship which a great dark-green wave was uplifting, Wolf
found himself unaccountably recalling certain casual
little things that he had seen that day—seen without
knowing that he had seen them! He recalled the underside
of the bark of a torn-off willow-branch that he had
caught sight of in his walk by the Lunt. He recalled the
peculiar whitish-yellowness hidden in the curves of an
opening fern-frond which he had passed somewhere on
the road from King’s Barton. He recalled the sturdy
beauty, full of a rich, harsh, acrid power, of a single
chestnut-bud, which he had unconsciously noted in the
outskirts of Blacksod. He recalled certain tiny snail-shells
clinging to the stalk of some new-grown dock-leaf
whose appearance had struck his mind somewhere in
those meadows.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When, after the slow ebbing of what really was a very
brief passage of time, but what seemed to Wolf something
more than time and different from time, they stood
together again outside the hut, there came over him a
vague feeling, as if he had actually invaded and possessed
something of the virginal aloofness of the now
darkened fields.</p>

<p class='pindent'>With his hand over Gerda’s shoulder he drank up a
great mystery from those cool, wide spaces. His fingers
clutched the soft collar of the girl’s cloak. He was conscious
of her breathing—so steady, so gently, and yet so
<span class='it'>living</span>—like the breath of a warm, soft animal in the
velvet darkness. He was conscious of her personality as
something quivering and quick, and yet as something
solitary, unapproachable.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly she broke the silence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you want me to whistle for you?” she asked, in
a low, docile voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The words reached his ears from an enormous distance.
They came travelling to him over rivers, over mountains,
over forests; and as they took shape in his consciousness,
something quite different from what he had felt for her
swelled up in his throat. He took her head between his
hands and kissed her as he had never in his life kissed
any woman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lob will hear it,” he said with a rough, happy laugh.
“But let him hear it! What does it matter now?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But she moved a few paces away and he watched her
whitish shadowily-blurred face as if it had been the face
of an immortal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And he knew, without <span class='it'>seeing</span> that it was so, that her
expression as she whistled was like the expression of a
child asleep, or of a child happily, peacefully dead.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And, though it was into the night that she now poured
those liquid notes, the tone of their drawn-out music was
a tone full of the peculiar feeling of one hour alone of
all the hours of night and day. It was the tone of the hour
just before dawn, the tone of that life which is not sound,
but only withheld breath, the breath of cold buds not
yet green, of earth-bound bulbs not yet loosed from their
sheaths, the tone of the flight of swallows across chilly
seas as yet far off from the warm pebbled beaches towards
which they are steering their way.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda’s whistling died away now into a silence that
seemed to come surging back with a palpable increase of
visible darkness in its train.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the girl remained standing just where she was,
quite motionless, about ten paces away from him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He also remained motionless, where he was, without
sign or word.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And just as two straight poplar-trees that in some continuous
storm had been bent down so that their branches
have mingled, when the storm is over rise up erect and
are once more completely separate and completely themselves,
so this man and this girl, whose relation to each
other could never be quite the same again, remained distinct,
removed, aloof, each standing like a silent bivouac-watcher,
guarding the smouldering camp-fire of their
own hidden thoughts.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Thus, and not otherwise, had stood, in the green dews
of some umbrageous Thessalian valley at the very dawn
of time, Orion and Merope, joined and yet so mysteriously
divided by this sweet fatality! So in the same green
dews had stood Deucalion and Pyrrha, while the earth
waited for its new offspring. They also, those primeval
lovers, had pondered thus, content and happy, bewildered
and sad, while over their heads the darkness descended
upon Mount Pelion, or the white moonlight
flooded with silver the precipices of Ossa!</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he thought of these things, he made up his mind
that he would refrain from any sentimental attempt to
bridge the impassable gulf between what Gerda was feeling
then and what he was feeling.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. No casual words
of easy tenderness should spoil the classical simplicity of
their rare encounter! For classical it had been, in its
arbitrariness, in its abruptness, in its heroic defiance of
so many obstacles; as he had always prayed that any
great love-affair of his might be.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Their words to each other, when at length they did
break the spell and wander back hand in hand to where
they had separated from Lob, were simple and natural—reduced,
in fact, to the plain level of prosaic, practical
anxieties.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s the devil!” grumbled Wolf; “but there it is,
sweetheart, and we’ve got to face it. It’s not only <span class='it'>my</span>
mother, but <span class='it'>your</span> mother we shall have to deal with. I
know only too well that I’ve never been to Oxford. I
know I have no ‘honourable’ in front of my name and
I know that what Mr. Urquhart gives me will be barely
enough for three people to live upon. There it is, my
sweet, and we’ve got to face it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t think your mother will want to live with us,”
said the girl quietly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf winced at this. Somehow or other he had
grown so used to thinking of his mother and himself as
one person, that it gave him a very queer feeling—as if
Gerda had inserted a tiny needle of ice into his heart—to
think of the two of them under separate roofs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A moment later, however, and the feeling passed,
crushed under the logic of his reason. It was, of course,
inevitable—so he said to himself—that Gerda, young
girl though she was, should want a hearth of her own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No,” he answered, emphatically enough. “We must
live by ourselves.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Father won’t give us anything,” said Gerda.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s all right,” he chuckled, laughing surlily but
not maliciously. “I’ve no desire to be supported out of
tomb-making! No, no, sweetheart; what we’ve got to find
is some tiny shanty of our own, almost as small as our
cow-shed, where neither your mother nor my mother can
interfere with us.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you think Mrs. Solent will be <span class='it'>very</span> angry?” she
enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This time her words produced a more serious shock.
He felt as if one of his arms or legs had been amputated
and was stuck up as a ninepin for Gerda to throw things
at, not knowing what she did.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll deal with her, anyway,” he replied.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We’ll have to have our banns read out in church,”
said Gerda.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We shall!” he conceded, bringing out the syllables
like pistol-shots; “but all that part of it will be awful.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda snatched her fingers from him and clapped her
hands together. “Don’t let’s be married!” she cried
gaily. “It’ll be far more fun not to be; and if I have a
child it’ll be a bastard, like the kings in history!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf had already formed a very definite image in
his mind of the enchanted hovel where he would live
with this unparalleled being, free from all care.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We can’t manage it without being married, Gerda;
and as for bastards——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hush!” she cried. “We’re talking nonsense. Gipoo
Cooper told me I should never have a child.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was silenced by this; and then, after a pause, “I
don’t believe Urquhart would make any fuss,” he said
meditatively. “It wouldn’t interfere with my work.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What you don’t realize,” she protested in a low
voice, “is how completely different my family is from
yours. Why, Father never says a word like he’d been
educated or been to School.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf refused to let this pass.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Perhaps <span class='it'>you</span> don’t realize, Missy,” he flung out, in
a clear, emphatic voice, “that my father died in Ramsgard
Workhouse!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her commentary upon this information was to snatch
his hand and raise it to her lips.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tisn’t where a gentleman dies,” she responded, “that
makes the difference. ’Tis where he’s born.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, damn all this!” he cried abruptly. “I don’t care
if your father talks his head off with Dorset talk; and
all Blacksod knows that my father threw himself to the
dogs. I’m going to live for the rest of my life in Dorsetshire,
and I’m going to live alone with my sweet
Gerda!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He hugged her to his heart as he spoke.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m very thankful that you like my whistling,” she
said, rather breathlessly, when he let her go. “I don’t
know what I should have done if you hadn’t.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Like it!” he cried. “Oh, Gerda, my Gerda, I can’t tell
you what it’s like. I’ve never heard anything to touch it
and never shall; and that’s the long and short of it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Thus discoursing, the lovers arrived at the prostrate
elm-trunk where they had left their belongings. It looked
so familiar and yet so different now, as they stumbled
upon it in the darkness, that Wolf received the kind of
shock that people get when, after some world-changing
adventure, they encounter the reproachful sameness of
some well-known aspect of hearth and home. And there
was Lob! The boy was crouched in a posture like that
of a reproachful goblin. He was engaged in cutting with
his pocket-knife—in spite of the darkness—deep, jagged
incisions in the handle of Wolf’s stick! Much time was
to pass before those unevennesses in the handle of that
oak cudgel ceased to compel its owner to recall with
bitter-sweet vividness the events of that incredible March
Wednesday!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know’d you’d go rat-hunting,” was his sulky greeting.
Evidently to Lob’s mind no other occupation than
this could account for their protracted absence from his
side. “I know’d you’d do it. Girls is never to be trusted,
girls isn’t. ’Tis in their constitution to betray.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good Lord, Lob!” cried Wolf. “Where did you get
that sentence? Have you been composing that speech
ever since we left?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Look here, Sis,” declared the boy, standing in front
of her with the air of a robber-chief. “You’ve got to fork
out! You’ve got to give threepence to I, or never no more
will I take your word!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the girl’s tone was now the self-composed, elder
sister’s tone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope you only took one egg, Lob; like I always tell
you to.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I won,” he repeated obstinately. “I won; so you
pays.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Show me the egg,” said Gerda. “Where is it? I hope
it <span class='it'>wasn’t</span> the only one. Have you blown it without making
that silly big hole you always make? Show it to me,
Lob!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t show it to ’ee, for I ain’t got it,” grumbled the
boy. “I got a nest, all right; and I got a egg all right.
There were four on ’em—all wonderful specks—in thik
nest; and I minded what you always says to I, and I
only took one.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where is it, then? Show it to us, Lob!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lob moved nearer to Wolf. “You won’t let she cheat I
of thik threepence,” he pleaded querulously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where is that egg, Lob?” repeated the young girl.
“He’s up to something; you mark my words!” she added.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They girls be never to be trusted, be they?” grumbled
the boy, sidling up still closer to Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You know perfectly well you can always trust me,
Lob!” protested Gerda indignantly. “It’s you who we
can’t trust now; isn’t it, Mr. Solent?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man looked from one to the other. It amused him
to listen to such contending voices from these two blurred
spots of whiteness in the dark; while he himself, full of
an unutterably sweet indolence, acted as their languid
umpire. He was delighted, too, as well as amazed, by the
intense gravity with which Gerda took this trifling disagreement.
How quaint girls were! If he had caught Lob
stealing his very watch in the darkness and transferring
it to his own pocket, he felt, just then, that he would
hardly have noticed the incident!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Haven’t I won over she, Mr. Solent?” whined the
child. “I found thik nestie fields and fields away from
where us be now. ’Twere in monstrous girt hedge, thik
nestie, and I scratched myself cruel getting my hand in.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why haven’t you got the egg, then?” insisted the girl,
in a hard, accusing voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Cos I broke the bloody thing!” wailed the boy desperately.
“I were crossing one of they darned fields and
I treadit in a girt rabbit-gin and came near to breaking
me neck, let alone thik bloody egg.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lob, I’m right-down ashamed of you!” cried Gerda,
in a voice quivering with moral indignation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What be up to now, then?” responded the boy. “What
be all this hullabaloo about, when a person tells straight
out what a person gone and done? If it be so turble hard
to ’ee to lose threepence, why did ’ee go rat-hunting with
<span class='it'>him</span> here and leave anyone all lonesome-like? For all
<span class='it'>you</span> care, a chap might have been tossed, this here dark
night, by some o’ they girt bullicks!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His voice grew plaintive; but Gerda was unmoved.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You never found any nest at all, Lob, and you know
you didn’t.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lobbie’s voice sounded now as if he very soon might
burst into tears.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I shan’t have no shilling! I shan’t have no shilling
without I gets the threepence you betted wi’ I!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf began fumbling in his pocket; but the girl
stopped him with a quick movement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lob,” she said sternly, “you’ve never lied to me before,
in all the rat-hunts, and nuttings, and blackberryings,
and mushroomings we’ve ever had together. What’s
come over you, Lob? Oh, I <span class='it'>am</span> ashamed of you! ’Tisn’t
as if I were Mother or Dad. ’Tisn’t as if we hadn’t always
done everything together. You’re not nice company,
any more, Lob, for people to go about with! I shall always
have to say to anyone in the future, ‘Take care,
now, you can never depend upon what Lob Torp says!’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf, seating himself in the darkness upon the fallen
tree-trunk, listened in amazement to this dialogue. The
moods of women, except for those of his mother, were a
phenomenon the ebbings and flowings of which had
hardly presented themselves to his deeper consciousness.
He obtained now, in listening to Gerda’s righteous anger,
an inkling of the supernatural power which these beings
have of bringing to bear upon the male conscience exactly
that one accusation, of all others, which will pierce
it to its heart’s core!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had no conception of how Gerda had found out
that the boy was lying, and he felt at that moment a
faint and perhaps scandalous wave of sympathy pass
through him for Lobbie Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lob himself felt this at once with a child’s clairvoyance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s cross about the threepence,” he whispered, leaning
against the man’s knee, “but you’ll pay it, won’t you,
Mr. Solent?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had grown weary by this time of the whole discussion.
He took advantage of the darkness to transfer
from his own pocket to that of this fellow wrong-doer at
least twice as much as he was demanding.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on,” he said, when the clandestine transaction
was accomplished, “let’s get back to the Blacksod road
before we’re completely benighted!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rose and moved on between them, Lob in penitent
and rather shamefaced silence carrying the great wicker-basket,
at the bottom of which reposed a few fading marigolds
and some handfuls of watercress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The excitement of climbing over the railings at the
very edge of the river-bank, and the pride she took in being
able to show her power of guiding her lover through
the darkened fields, quickly restored Gerda’s good-humour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We’ll drop Lob at the beginning of Chequers Street,”
Wolf said, when they at last felt the hard road from
Nevilton to Blacksod under their feet. “Do you think,”
he went on, “that Miss Malakite will expect us still, so
long after tea-time?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I was going to stay to supper with her,” said Gerda;
“so I don’t think it’ll matter. She’ll give us tea, though,
late as we are! She won’t have noticed the time at all,
very likely. She never does, when her father’s away and
she’s reading.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>With the sister and brother leaning against him naturally
and familiarly, each on one of his arms, Wolf
with his oak-stick held firmly in the hand adjoining the
now somewhat dragging and tired bird’s-nester, strode
along towards the lights of the town, in a deep, diffused
warmth of unalloyed happiness. The days of his life
seemed to stretch out before him in a lovely Spring-scented
perspective.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The few misgivings that remained to him about his
marriage fell away in that hedge-scented darkness—a
darkness that seemed to separate the earth from the sky
with the formless presence of some tremendous but
friendly deity, under whose protection he bore those two
along. And as he felt Gerda press his arm softly and
lightly against her young body, the sensation came over
him that he had only to walk on and on .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. on and on
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just like this .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in order to bring that secret
“mythology” of his into relation with the whole world.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Whom Long Thomas has taken for his leman,” he repeated
in his heart; and it seemed to him as if the lights
of the town, which now began to welcome them, were the
lights of a certain imaginary city which from his early
childhood had appeared and disappeared on the margin
of his mind. It was wont to appear in strange places, this
city of his fancy .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. at the bottom of teacups .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or
the window-panes of privies .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in the soapy water of
baths .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in the dirty marks on wall-papers .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in
the bleak coals of dead Summer-grates .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. between the
rusty railings of deserted burying-grounds .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. above
the miserable patterns of faded carpets .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. among the
nameless litter of pavement-gutters.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But whenever
he had seen it, it was always associated with the first
lighting up of lamps, and with the existence, but not
necessarily the presence, of someone .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. some girl .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
some boy .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. some unknown .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. whose place in his
life would resemble that first lighting of lamps .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that
sense of arriving out of the cold darkness of empty fields
and lost ways into the rich, warm, glowing security of
that mysterious town.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Whom Long Thomas has taken for his leman,” he
repeated once more. And he thought to himself, “It’s all
in that word .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in that word; and in coming along a
dark road to where lamps are lit!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap08'>THE THREE PEEWITS</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>They got rid of Lobbie at the corner of Chequers
Street, and moved on, side by side, past the lighted shop-windows.
It was a further revelation to him of the ways
of girls, to notice that Gerda repeatedly stopped him,
with a childish clutch at his coat-sleeve, before some
trifle in those lighted windows that attracted her attention.
Her eyes were dreamy with a soft languorous happiness;
while her little cries of pleasure at what she saw
made ripples in the surface of her mental trance like the
rising of a darting shoal of minnows to the top of deep
water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As for his own mood, the lights of the town, its traffic
and its crowds, threw him upon a rich, dark, incredible
intimacy with her, whose sweetness reduced everything
to a vague reassuring stage-play. Everything became a
play whose living puppets seemed so touchingly lovable
that he could have wept to behold them, and to know that
she was beholding them with him!</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they reached the door of the Malakite book-shop,
however, he became conscious of so deep an unwillingness
to face the look of Christie’s steady brown eyes that
he impetuously begged off.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t do it tonight,” he said; “so don’t ’ee press
me, my precious!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Their farewell was grave and tender; but he left her
without looking back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was then that hunger came upon him; and making
his way to the Three Peewits, he ordered a substantial
supper, beneath the not altogether sympathetic gaze of
Queen Victoria.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He remained for nearly two hours lingering over this
meal, while at the back of his mind the ditty about
Shaftesbury-town and Yellow Bracken mingled with the
fragrance of the old hostelry’s old wine. When at last he
rose from the table, it occurred to him that Darnley
Otter had mentioned on the previous day that both the
brothers might be here this night. Led by a mysterious
desire, just then—not quite understood by himself—for
masculine society, he entered the little inner parlour of
the Three Peewits. Here he found himself in a thick cloud
of tobacco-smoke and a still thicker murmur of men’s
voices. The change from his erotic musings into so
social and crude an atmosphere was more bewildering
to his mind than he had expected. He gazed round him,
befogged and blinking.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Darnley Otter rose at once to greet him, leading
him to an aperture in the wall, where drinks were served.
Standing there by Darnley’s side, he made polite, hurried
bows to the different members of the company, as his
friend mentioned their names, and while his glass was
filled and refilled with brandy, he found his eyes turning
inevitably to the place where Jason sat—sat as if he
had been doing nothing else since he came into that
room but wait for Wolf’s arrival. The man was watching
him intently now, and without a trace of that whimsical
humour with which he had departed from him to
walk round the edge of Lenty Pond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf began at once summoning up from the recesses
of his own nature all the psychic power he could bring
to bear, to cope with this new situation. As he chatted
at that little counter with Darnley, in the midst of a
rambling, incoherent flow of talk from all parts of the
room, he deliberately drank glass after glass of brandy,
amused at the nervousness with which Darnley observed
this proceeding, and growing more and more determined
to fathom the mystery of that self-lacerated being on the
other side of the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It seemed to him now that Jason’s head, as he saw it
across that smoke-filled space, resembled that of some
lost spirit in Dante’s Inferno, swirling up out of the pit
and crying, “Help! Help! Help!” It was curious to
himself how ready he felt just then to respond to that
cry. “I must have drunk up this new strength from possessing
Gerda,” he thought to himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley’s trim beard continued to wag with gentlemanly
urbanity, as he laughed and jested with various
people in different parts of the room, but Wolf could see
that he was growing more and more nervous about his
brother. Nor was this nervousness without justification.
Jason had turned his face to his neighbour, who was a
grim farmer from Nevilton, and was uttering words that
evidently seemed to startle the man, if not to shock him;
for his face grew grimmer than ever, and he kept shifting
his chair a little further away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Things were at this pass when the door opened with
a violent swing, and there came in together Mr. Torp,
Mr. T. E. Valley, and a tall handsome browbeating individual,
who was presently introduced to Wolf as Mr.
Manley of Willum’s Mill.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The vicar of King’s Barton seemed to have been drinking
already; for he staggered straight up to the counter,
pulling the plump stone-cutter unceremoniously after
him by the lapel of his coat. The heavy-jowled Mr. Manley
moved across the room and seated himself by the
side of the farmer from Nevilton, whom he addressed
loudly and familiarly as Josh Beard. Wolf noticed that
Mr. Beard, in a very sour and malicious manner, began
at once repeating to this newcomer whatever it had been
that Jason Otter had just said to him; while Mr. Manley
of Willum’s Mill proceeded with equal promptness to
cast looks of jocose and jeering brutality at the unfortunate
poet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My friend Mr. Torp was in the bar-room; so I brought
him in,” said T. E. Valley, shaking hands with Wolf as if
he had not seen him for years.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tis no impertinence, I hope, for I to come in,” said
the stone-cutter, humbly; and it struck Wolf’s mind as a
kind of mad dream—not a nightmare, but just one of
those dreams where men and houses and animals and
trees are all involved and interchanged—that this grotesque
figure of a man should be the father of Gerda!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Torp and I are old friends,” said Wolf, with cordial
emphasis, “and I can’t tell you how glad I am to
see you again, Vicar! Will you let me order you something?
The brandy here seems to me uncommonly
good.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In answer to Wolf’s appeal, the barmaid, whose personality,
as she appeared and disappeared at that square
orifice, grew more and more dreamlike, brought three
large glasses of the drink he demanded, two of which he
promptly handed to Valley and Torp, while the third
he appropriated for himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tis wondrous,” remarked Mr. Torp, receiving his
glass with unsteady hand; “ ’tis wondrous for a man what
works with chisel and hammer all day, to sit and see
what folks be like who never do a stroke. I bain’t one o’
they myself who do blame the gentry. What I do say be
this, and I don’t care who hears it. I do say that a man
be a man while he lives; and a gent be a gent while he
lives. Durn me if that ain’t the truth.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But when we’re dead, Mr. Torp,” called out the voice
of Jason from the further end of the room, “what are we
when we’re dead?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Evenin’, Mr. Otter, evenin’ to ’ee, Sir! Dead, say ’ee?
I be the man to answer that conundrum. Us be as our
tombstones be! Them as has ‘Torp’ writ on ’um in clean,
good marble, be with the Lord. They others be with
wold Horny.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Several mellow guffaws greeted this speech, for Gerda’s
parent was evidently a privileged jester among them; but
to the dismay of his brother, who was now talking in a
quiet whisper to Wolf, the hollow voice of Jason floated
once more across the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ask that drunk priest over there why he took young
Redfern from a good job and turned him into a pious
zany.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a vibration in his tone that at once quieted
the general clatter of tongues, and everyone looked at Mr.
Valley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. quite .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. understand your .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. question
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mr. Otter,” stammered the little man.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The bull-like voice of Mr. Manley of Willum’s Mill
broke in then.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“His reverence may be hard of hearing. Shall <span class='it'>I</span> do the
asking of him?” And the great bully-boy hesitated not
to roar out in thundering tones: “Mister Otter here be
asking of ’ee, and this whole company be waiting to know
from ’ee, what god-darned trick you played on young
Redfern afore he died.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must beg you, Mr. Manley,” said Darnley Otter,
whose face, as Wolf watched it, had become stiff as a
mask, “I must beg you not to make a scene tonight.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I am still quite .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. quite .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. at a loss .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a loss
to understand,” began the agitated clergyman, moving
forward a step or two towards his aggressor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mr. Torp interrupted him. “Ask thee bloody questions
of thee wone bloody millpond and don’t lift up
thee’s roaring voice among thee’s betters!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a considerable hum of applause among the
company at this; for Mr. Manley of Willum’s Mill was
universally disliked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the farmer took no heed of this manifestation of
public opinion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do ’ee hear what Jack Torp be saying?” he jeered,
stretching out his long legs and emptying his glass of
gin-and-bitters. “He’s sick as Satan wi’ I; and I’ll tell
’ee the cause for’t.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a general stir in the room and a craning
forward of necks. The seasoned cronies of the Three Peewits
had long ago discovered that the most delectable of
all social delights was a quarrel that just stopped short
of physical violence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The cause for’t be,” went on the master of Willum’s
Mill, “that I ordered me mother’s grave proper-like from
Weymouth, ’stead of ferretting round his dog-gone yard,
where there bain’t naught but litter and rubbish and paupers’
monuments.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Having thrown out this challenge, the farmer drew in
his legs, placed his great hands upon his knees, and
leaned forward. There was a dead silence in that ale-embrowned
atmosphere, as if the “private bar” itself, the
very walls of which must have been yellow with old leisurely
disputes, were aware of something exceptional in
that spurt of human venom.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Torp gave a quick sideways glance to see how the
“gentry” were behaving. But Wolf was discreetly occupied
in ordering more drinks—he had already had to tell
the barmaid to “put down” what he ordered, for his
pockets were empty—and Darnley was merely pulling at
his beard and keeping his eye on the Vicar.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Thee’s mother’s stone!” snorted the monument-maker,
with resonant contempt. “ ’Twere ready and beauteous,
gents all, ’twere ready and beauteous, thik stone! All
what passed down street did stop for to see ’un, and did
say to theyselves, ‘Thik fine stone be too good for a
farmer’s old woman! Thik fine stone be a titled lady’s
stone!’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The farmer’s gin-dazed wits could only reply to this
by a repeated, “ ’Twere a pauper’s throw-away; ’twere a
workhouse six-foot and nothing!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Torp’s voice rose higher still. “This Manley here
were afeared to leave his mother in ground for a day
without a stone on her. He were afeared the poor woman
would come out on’s grave to tell tales on him, the old
goat-sucker! So while thik fine stone were lying in yard
getting weathered-like, as is good for they foreign marbles,
this girt vool of a nag’s head what must ’a do but
drive hay-wagon to Chesil, and bring whoam a silly
block o’ Portland, same as they fish-folk do cover their
bones wi’, what have never seed a bit o’ marble!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Under the impact of this eloquent indictment, which
excited immense hilarity throughout all the company, Mr.
Manley rose unsteadily to his feet and moved towards his
enemy. But Mr. Torp, ensconced between Darnley Otter
and T. E. Valley, awaited his approach unmoved.</p>

<p class='pindent'>To the surprise of all, the big bully skirted this little
group, and, joining Wolf at the liquor-stained counter,
bellowed harmlessly for more gin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was at this point in the proceedings that more serious
trouble began; for Jason Otter, pointing with a
shaky forefinger at the Reverend Valley, screamed out in
a paroxysm of fury:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s you who talk about me to Urquhart and
Monk.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’ve found it out now.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It’s you who
do it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Peewit cronies must have felt that this unexpected
clash between two of their “gentry” rose from more
subtle depths than those to which they were accustomed;
for they were stricken into a silence, at this juncture,
which was by no means a comfortable one.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Otter here,” broke in the owner of Willum’s Mill,
“Mr. Otter here have been telling pretty little tales of
the high doings what go on up at King’s Barton. Mr.
Otter says Squire Urquhart have sold his soul to that
black son-of-a-gun who works in’s garden, and that ’tis
bookseller Malakite here in Blacksod whose books do
larn ’em their deviltries!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. is .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. some great .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. mistake
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in your .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in your mind, Mr. Manley.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The words were uttered by T. E. Valley in such shaky
tones that Wolf was relieved when he saw Darnley take
the parson reassuringly by the arm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mistake?” roared the farmer. “I bain’t one for to say
what I ain’t got chapter nor text for saying! My friend,
Josh Beard here, of Nevilton, County of Somerset, be as
good a breeder of short-horns as any in Darset; and ’a do
say ’a have heerd such things tonight such as no man’s
lips should utter; and heerd them, too, from one as we
all do know.” And he turned round and leered at Jason
Otter with the leer of a tipsy hangman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hold thee’s tongue in thee’s bullick’s-head!” cried the
indignant monument-maker. “A gent’s a gent, I tell ’ee;
and when a quiet gent, like what’s with us tonight, be
moderate wambly in’s head, owing to liquor, ’tisn’t for
a girt bull-frog like thee to lift up voice.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Bull-frog be ——” grumbled the big farmer, hiding
his inability to contend in repartee with Mr. Torp under
an increased grossness of speech. “What do a son-of-a-bitch
like thee know of the ways of the gentry?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Malakite?” muttered the breeder of short-horns.
“Bain’t Malakite the old beggar what got into trouble
with the police some ten years since?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So ’twere,” agreed the grateful tenant of Willum’s
Mill, “so ’twere, brother Beard. ’A did, as thee dost say,
get into the devil’s own trouble. ’Twere along of his gals;
so some folks said. ’A was one of they hoary wold sinners
what Bible do tell of.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Twere even so, neighbour; ’twere even so,” echoed
Mr. Beard. “And I <span class='it'>have</span> heerd that old Bert Smith up at
Ramsgard could tell a fine story about thik little job.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s mind was too flustered with brandy just then
to receive more than a vague shock of confused ambiguity
from this startling hint; but the next remark of the man
from Nevilton cleared his brains with the violence of a
bucket of ice-cold water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Bert Smith may sell his grand school-hats all he will;
but they do tell out our way—though I know nought of
that, seeing I were living at Stamford Orcus in them
days—that thik same poor wisp o’ bedstraw dursn’t call
his own gal by his own name, whether ’a be in shop or in
church.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s God’s own truth you’ve a-heerd, Josh Beard,”
echoed the triumphant Mr. Manley. “ ’Tisn’t safe for
that poor man to call his own daughter daughter, in the
light o’ what folks, as knows, do report. If I didn’t respect
any <span class='it'>real</span> gentleman”—and to Wolf’s consternation
the gin-bemused stare of the farmer was turned upon himself—“and
if I weren’t churchwarden and hadn’t voted
Conservative for nigh thirty years, I would show this
here stone-chipper the kind of gallimaufry these educated
gents will cook for theyselves, afore they’re done!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s wits, moving now, in spite of the fumes of
smoke and alcohol, with restored clarity, achieved a momentous
orientation of many obscure matters. He recalled
certain complicated hints and hesitations of Selena
Gault. He recalled the reckless and embittered gaiety
of his mother. With a shaky hand he finished his last
glass and laid it down on the counter. Then he looked
across the room at the two farmers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t know whose feelings you are so careful of,
Mr. Manley,” he said. “But since I happen to be myself
one of these unfortunate ‘educated’ people, and since Mr.
Solent, my father, came to grief in this neighbourhood,
I should be very glad indeed to hear anything else you
may be anxious to tell us.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His voice, heard now by the whole company for the
first time, had a disquieting tone; and everyone was silent.
But Jason Otter rose to his feet, and, in the midst
of that silence and under the startled attention of all eyes
in the room, walked with short quick steps across the
floor till he came close up to Farmer Manley, who was
leaning his back against the little counter and who had
his hands in his pockets; and there he stopped, facing
him. No one but Wolf could see the expression on his
countenance; and there were all kinds of different versions
afterwards as to what actually happened. But what
Wolf himself knew was that the excited man was no
longer under the restraint of his natural timidity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His own intelligence was so clairvoyantly aroused at
that moment, that he could recall later every flicker of
the conflicting impulses that shot through him. The one
that dominated the rest was a categorical certainty that
some immediate drastic action was necessary. What he
did was to take Jason by the shoulders and fling him
backwards into an old beer-stained chair that stood unoccupied
against the neighbouring wall. In the violence
of this action an earthenware jug of water—and Wolf
had time to notice the mellow varnish of its surface—fell
with a crash upon the floor. There was a hush now
throughout the room, and most of the company leaned
excitedly forward. Jason himself, huddled limply in a
great wooden chair, turned his devastated white face and
lamentable eyes full upon his aggressor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I didn’t mean .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” he gasped.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all right, Solent,” whispered Darnley, accepting
a chair by Jason’s side, which its owner willingly vacated.
“You couldn’t have done anything else.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t know about that, Otter,” Wolf whispered back.
“I expect we’re all a little fuddled. Sit down, won’t you,
and when he’s rested we’ll clear out, eh? I’ve had enough
of this.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>All the patrons of the private bar were gathered now
in little groups about the room; and before long, with
sly inquisitive glances and many secretive nudges and
nods, the bulk of the company drifted out, leaving the
room nearly empty.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. understand.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I didn’t see.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Was
he going to <span class='it'>bite</span> you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The words were from T. E. Valley; and Wolf was so
astonished at the expression he used, that he answered
with a good deal of irritation:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do <span class='it'>you</span> bite people, Mr. Valley?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The priest’s feelings were evidently outraged by this.
“What do you mean?” he protested querulously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I mean,” began Wolf. “Oh, I don’t know! But to a
stranger down here there does seem a good deal that’s
funny about you all! You must forgive me, Mr. Valley;
but, on my soul, you brought it on yourself. <span class='it'>Bite?</span> It’s
rather an odd idea, isn’t it? You did say <span class='it'>bite</span>, didn’t
you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were interrupted by Mr. Manley of Willum’s
Mill, who, with Mr. Joshua Beard in tow, was steering
for the door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you hurt the gentleman, Sir?” said Mr. Manley to
Wolf, in the grave, cautious voice of a drunkard anxious
to prove his sobriety.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You drove the gentleman into fold, seems so!” echoed
Mr. Beard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In thus approaching Wolf it was inevitable that the
two worthies should jostle the portly frame of Mr. Torp,
who, leaning against the back of a chair, with an empty
pewter beer-mug trailing by its handle from one of his
plump fingers, had fallen into an interlude of peaceful
coma.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who the bloody hell be ’ee barging into?” murmured
Mr. Torp, aroused thus suddenly to normal consciousness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Paupers’ moniments!” jeered the farmer. “Nought
but paupers’ moniments in’s yard; and ’a can still talk
grand and mighty!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The stone-cutter struggled to gather his wandering
wits together. In his confusion the only friendly shape he
could visualize was the form of Mr. Valley, and he
promptly made all the use he could of that.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The Reverend here,” he said, “can bear witness to I,
in the face of all thee’s bloody millponds and hay-wagons.
The Reverend here do know what they words,
‘Torp, Moniment-Maker, Blacksod,’ do signify. The Reverend
here did see, for his own self, thik girt stone what
I did put up over first young man.” He now removed his
bewildered little pig’s-eyes from Mr. Valley and fixed
them upon Wolf. “And here be second young man who
can bear witness to I; and, darn it, thee’d best do as I do
say, Mr. Redfern Number Two, for thee’s been clipping
and cuddling our Gerda, ’sknow, and I be only to tell
Missus on ’ee, and fat be in fire.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Had not the whole scene become to him by this time
incredibly phantasmal, such an unexpected introduction
of Gerda’s name, on this night of all nights, might have
struck a villainous blow at his life-illusion. As it was,
however, he could only wonder at the perspicacity of
drunken fathers, and pull himself together for an adequate
retort.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My name is Solent, my good sir, as you ought to
know,” he said. And then he turned to the two farmers,
who were nudging each other and leering at him like a
couple of schoolboy bullies. “Mr. Torp and I are the
best of friends,” he remarked sternly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Friend of Torp,” chuckled Mr. Manley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Torp’s friend,” echoed Mr. Beard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Thee’d best keep thee’s daughter in house, Jack!”
continued Mr. Manley. “Lest t’other one rumple her,
same as first one did,” concluded Mr. Beard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf, beyond his conscious intention, clenched the fingers
of his right hand savagely; but his wits were clear
now, and he mastered the impulse. “Whatever happens, I
mustn’t make an ass of myself tonight,” he thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’d better go out into the air, gentlemen,” he said
quietly, “and cool your heads, or you’ll get into trouble.
Come, Mr. Torp. You and I must have a last glass together;
and you, too, Vicar.” And he led them away
towards the little counter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The farmers moved slowly toward the door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Redfern Number Two, ’a called un,” Wolf heard
Mr. Beard saying. “Now what be the meaning o’ <span class='it'>that</span>,
me boy?” He couldn’t hear the big farmer’s answer; but
whatever it was, it ended in a sort of bawdy rhyme, of
which all he could catch was the chanted refrain, “Jimmie
Redfern, <span class='it'>he</span> were there!” And with that the door
swung behind them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had just time to obtain three more drinks from the
barmaid before she pulled down the little wooden slide
and indicated in no equivocal manner that eleven o’clock
had struck.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Simultaneously with this a serving-boy entered and began
to turn down the lights. “We ought to be starting for
home,” said Darnley Otter, from where he sat by his
brother, whose great melancholy eyes were fixed upon
vacancy. “And it’s none too soon, either!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll be getting home-along me own self, now this here
lad be meddling with they lights;” remarked Mr. Torp,
emptying his glass. “Good-night to ’ee all,” he added,
taking down his coat and hat from a peg; “and if I’ve
exceeded in speech to any gent here”—and he glanced
anxiously at Wolf and Mr. Valley—“it be contrary to me
nature and contrary to me profession.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. suppose .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you won’t mind .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” murmured
the voice of T. E. Valley, who had remained at the
counter, sipping the drink, to which Wolf had treated
him, as if it were the first he had tasted that night, “if I
come with you? I don’t want to get on anybody’s nerves”—and
he looked at Jason Otter, who without being asleep
seemed to have drifted off into another world—“but I
don’t like that walk alone at night.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Of course you must come with us, Valley,” said Darnley.
“Though what you can find so frightening in that
quiet lane I can’t imagine.” Saying this he pulled his
brother up upon his feet and helped him into his overcoat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Half-an-hour later they were all four making their
way past the last houses of Blacksod. Darnley and Jason
were walking in front; Wolf and T. E. Valley about six
paces to the rear. They were all silent, as if the contrast
between the noisy scene they had just left and the hushed
quietness of the way were a rebuke to their souls.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In one of the smaller houses, where for some reason
neither curtain nor blind had been drawn, Wolf could
see two candles burning on a small table at which someone
was still reading.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He touched Mr. Valley’s arm, and both the men stood
for a time looking at that unconscious reader. It was an
elderly woman who read there by those two candles, her
chin propped upon one arm and the other arm lying extended
across the table. The woman’s face had nothing
remarkable about it. The book she read was obviously,
from its shape and appearance, a cheap story; but as
Wolf stared in upon her, sitting there in that commonplace
room at midnight, an indescribable sense of the
drama of human life passed through him. For leagues
and leagues in every direction the great pastoral fields
lay quiet in their muffled dew-drenched aloofness. But
there, by those two pointed flames, one isolated consciousness
kept up the old familiar interest, in love, in birth,
in death, all the turbulent chances of mortal events. That
simple, pallid, spectacled head became for him at that
moment a little island of warm human awareness in the
midst of the vast non-human night.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He thought to himself how, in some future time, when
these formidable scientific inventions would have changed
the face of the earth, some wayward philosopher like
himself would still perhaps watch through a window a
human head <span class='it'>reading by candlelight</span>, and find such a
sight touching beyond words. Mentally he resolved once
more, while to Mr. Valley’s surprise he still lingered,
staring in at that candle-lit window, that while he lived
he would never allow the beauty of things of this sort
to be overpowered for him by anything that science
could do.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He submitted at last to his companion’s uneasiness and
walked on. But in his heart he thought: “That old woman
in there might be reading a story about my own life!
She might be reading about Shaftesbury-town and yellow
bracken and Gerda’s whistling! She might be reading
about Christie and the Malakite book-shop. She might be
reading about Mattie——” His thoughts veered suddenly.
“Mattie? Mattie Smith?” And a wavering suspicion that
had been gathering weight for some while in his mind
suddenly took to itself an irrefutable shape. “Lorna and
my father.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The little girl said we were alike.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
That’s what it is!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He did not formulate the word “sister” in any portion
of his consciousness where ideas express themselves in
words, but across some shadowy mental landscape
within him floated and drifted that heavy-faced girl with
a new and richly-charged identity! All the vague fragments
of association that had gathered here and there
in his life around the word “sister,” hastened now to
attach themselves to the personality of Mattie Smith
and to give it their peculiar glamour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How unreal my life seems to be growing,” he thought.
“London seemed fantastic to me when I lived there, like
a tissue of filmy threads; but .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. good Lord! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
compared with this!—It would be curious if that old
woman reading that book were really reading my history
and has now perhaps come to my death. Well, as long as
old women like that read books by candlelight there’ll
be <span class='it'>some</span> romance left!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind withdrew into itself with a jerk at this
point, trying to push away a certain image of things that
rose discomfortably upon him—the image of a countryside
covered from sea to sea by illuminated stations for
airships, overspread from sea to sea by thousands of
humming aeroplanes!</p>

<p class='pindent'>What would ever become of Tilly-Valley’s religion in
<span class='it'>that</span> world, with head-lights flashing along cemented
highways, and all existence dominated by electricity.
What would become of old women reading by candlelight?
What would become of his own life-illusion, his
secret “mythology,” in such a world?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Stubbornly he pushed this vision away. “I’ll live in my
own world to the end,” he said to himself. “Nothing shall
make me yield.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And while a gasping susurration at his side indicated
that he was, in his excitement, walking too fast for Mr.
Valley, he discovered that that grey feather of Christie’s
which served her as a marker in the “Urn Burial” had
risen up again in his mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And as he walked along, adapting his steps to his
companion’s shambling progress, he indulged in the
fancy that his soul was like a vast cloudy serpent of
writhing vapour that had the power of over-reaching
every kind of human invention. “All inventions,” he
thought, “come from man’s brains. And man’s soul can
escape from them and even while using them treat them
with contempt—treat them <span class='it'>as if they were not</span>! It can
slip through them like a snake, float over them like a
mist, burrow under them like a mole!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He swung his stick excitedly in the darkness, while
he gave his arm to Mr. Valley to help him along. He
felt as though he were entering upon some desperate, invisible
struggle to safeguard everything that was sacred
to him against modern inventions. “It’s queer,” he
thought to himself, “what the sight of that grey feather
in the book, and that old woman with the candle, have
done to my mind. I’ve made love to the limit; I’ve
brawled in a tavern to the limit; and here I am, with a
tipsy priest on my arm, thinking of nothing but defending
I don’t know what against motor-cars and aeroplanes!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He continued vaguely to puzzle himself, as they
lurched forward in the darkness, as to what it was in his
nature that made his seduction of Gerda, his encounter
with Jason, his discovery of Mattie, thus fall away from
his consciousness in comparison with that feather and
that candle; and he came finally to the conclusion, before
they reached King’s Barton, that there must be
something queer and inhuman in him. “But there it is,”
he finally concluded. “If I’m like that .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I <span class='it'>am</span> like
that! We must see what comes of it!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap09'>THE HORSE-FAIR</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>The first person of their acquaintance they encountered,
when Wolf and Mrs. Solent mingled with the
lively crowd that filled Ramsgard’s famous Castle Field
that afternoon, was none other than Mr. Albert Smith.
Wolf was amazed at the cordiality of his mother’s greeting;
and so quite evidently was the worthy hatter himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Solent was fashionably dressed; but what struck
her son more than her clothes at that moment was the incredible
power of her haughty profile, as she flung out
her light badinage, like so many shining javelins, at the
nervous tradesman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The thought rushed across his brain, as he watched
her: “She’s never had her chance in life! She was made
for large transactions and stirring events!” Letting his
gaze wander over the groups about them, Wolf caught
sight of Mr. Urquhart’s figure in the distance; and he
decided that, since sooner or later he would have to greet
the man, the best thing he could do was to get it over
as soon as possible, so as to be prepared to face his
Blacksod friends free of responsibility.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Leaving his companions to themselves, therefore, with
a nod at his mother, he plunged into the heart of that
motley scene. The day obviously was the culmination of
the Wessex Fair. The large expanse of meadow-land lying
between the castle-ruins and the railway was encircled
by booths, stalls, roundabouts, fortune-tellers’
tents, toy circuses—all the entertainments, in fact, which
the annual horde of migratory peddlers of amusement
offered, according to age-old tradition, to their rustic
clients.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the centre portion of this spacious fair-ground was
carefully roped off; and it was here that the riding and
driving competitions took place that gave so special
an interest to this particular afternoon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One segment of this roped-off circle had been converted
into a sort of privileged paddock, corresponding
to a race-course grand-stand, where the aristocracy of the
neighbourhood, whose carriages were drawn up under
the railway bank, could watch the proceedings in undisturbed
security.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The opportunity Wolf had seized of approaching Mr.
Urquhart was given him by the fact that the Squire of
King’s Barton was standing alone, close to the rope, at
some little distance from the privileged spot where most
of his compeers were gathered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was watching with absorbed interest a stately
parade of prize-stallions, who, adorned with ribbons and
other marks of distinction, ambled ponderously by, one
after another, as if they were parading in some gigantic
super-equine festival that ought to have had super-human
spectators! The creatures looked so powerful and so
contemptuous beside the stablemen who led them, that
Wolf, as he approached this procession, saw for a moment
the whole human race in an inferior and ignominious
light—saw them as some breed of diabolically clever
monkeys, who, by a debased trick of cunning, had been
able to reduce to servitude, though not to servility, animals
far nobler and more godlike than themselves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It makes you feel like a Yahoo, Sir,” said Wolf, as
he shook hands with Mr. Urquhart. “I mean it makes <span class='it'>me</span>
feel like a Yahoo. Good Lord! Look at that beast! Don’t
you get the sensation that those hooves are really making
the earth tremble?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mr. Urquhart, though he had grasped his secretary’s
hand warmly and had seemed pleased to see him,
took no more notice of this remark than if it had been
some negligible banality uttered by a complete stranger.
Wolf, standing by his side, said no more till the procession
had passed. His attention began to wander from
the great stallions to a mental consideration that made
him straighten his own shoulders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had suddenly become aware of the felicitous appropriateness
of Mr. Urquhart’s clothes; and although
his own overcoat was a good one and his cloth-hat new,
he felt somehow badly dressed in the man’s company, a
feeling that caused him considerable annoyance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Damn this accursed snobbishness!” he said to himself,
as he contemplated the vast grey flanks of the winner
of the third prize. “Why can’t I detach myself absolutely
from these things and see them as a visitor from Saturn
or Uranus would see them?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart turned to him when the last stallion
had passed by. “Do ’ee know who my man brought with
him over here?” he said, smiling.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf could only lift his thick eyebrows interrogatively.
He continued to feel uncomfortable under his employer’s
quizzical gaze. “He looks me up and down,” he thought
to himself, “as if I were a horse that had disappointed
him by not winning even a third prize.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You mean Monk?” he said. “I can’t guess whom he
brought with him. I thought he was driving <span class='it'>you</span>.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He put her on the box by his side,” went on the
squire. “It was that old servant of our good Otters. I
was compelled to look at the flowers in her bonnet and
the tassels on her cape all the way here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You don’t mean Dimity Stone?” murmured Wolf;
and he contemplated in a rapid inward vision that sly,
misogynistic eye fixed sardonically on the old woman’s
wizened back, and the chivalrous grand air with which
the coachman must have conversed with her, as he held
the reins.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I couldn’t let her walk,” went on the squire. “And
the Otters had left her behind. I suppose they hadn’t
room. They came in a wretched conveyance. I suppose
they got it from the hotel.” He swung about and surveyed
the crowd with indulgent arrogance. “I can just see the
good Darnley from here,” he said. “There!—can’t you?
I wonder where that terrible person who’s always drunk
has hidden himself! I saw <span class='it'>him</span>, too, a moment ago. And,
by gad, there’s Tilly-Valley! Let’s go and stir him up.
He won’t expect me to speak to him. You watch his face,
my boy, when I nudge his elbow. Eh? What? Come on.”
And greatly to Wolf’s annoyance he found himself compelled
to support his limping employer on his arm,
while the two of them pushed their way towards the
clergyman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tally ho! Run to earth!” was the squire’s greeting,
as, with Wolf at his elbow, he came up unobserved to
where the little priest was standing. “Afternoon, Valley!
Should have thought this sort of thing wasn’t in your
line; eh? what? Too many horsey rascals about? Too
many rowdy young men, eh?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>If Wolf was astonished at Mr. Urquhart’s familiar tone,
he was still more astonished at the expression on the
face of the nervous clergyman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Stammeringly Mr. Valley found his tongue.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Fine horses .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. more of them than usual .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. did
you see that grey one? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the Otters are here .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
they drove over .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I walked .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so did others .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
many others .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it would be nice if there were seats
here .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. don’t you think so? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. seats?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf could hardly bear to listen to these broken utterances
of the poor Vicar. There was something about
his pinched face, his shapeless nose, his thin neck, his
frightened eyes, that produced a profoundly pitiful feeling.
This sensation was accentuated by the way a certain
vein in the man’s throat stood out. Not only did it stand
out, it pulsed and vibrated. All the panic that Mr.
Urquhart’s presence provoked seemed concentrated in
that pulsing vein.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Seats, did you say?” chuckled the squire. “<span class='it'>You</span> don’t
need a seat at your age.” And leaning heavily on his
companion’s arm, he tapped the priest with the end of
his stick with an air of playful familiarity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It came over Wolf then, with a rush of sheer rage,
that he must get his employer away from this man at all
costs. Never had he liked Mr. Urquhart less. There was
something in his wrinkled white face, at that moment,
which suggested an out-rush of incredible evil—of evil
emerging, like some abominable vapour, from a level
of consciousness not often revealed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was tolerant enough of the various forms of
normal and abnormal sensuality; but what at that instant
he got a glimpse of, beneath this man’s gentlemanly
mask, was something different from viciousness. It was as
if some abysmal ooze from the slime of <span class='it'>that which underlies
all evil</span> had been projected to the surface.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come along, Sir. We must get back to the rope,”
Wolf found himself saying in a stern, dry voice. “They’re
starting the driving-match and I can’t let you miss <span class='it'>that</span>!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart’s hilarity seemed to sink fathom-deep
at the sound of his secretary’s voice. He permitted himself
to be pulled away. But Wolf noticed a perceptible increase
in his lameness as he drew him along; and glancing
sideways at his face, he was startled by the look of
almost imbecile vacuity that had replaced what had been
there before.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The crowd had thickened perceptibly now; and Wolf
realized that he was seeing the most characteristic gathering
for that portion of the countryside that he was ever
likely to see. Here were smart, self-satisfied young tradesmen
from Ramsgard with their wives and their girls.
Here were weather-stained carters from Blackmore; cider-makers
and cattle-dealers from Sedgemoor; stalwart
melancholy-looking shepherds from the high Quantocks;
a sprinkling of well-to-do farmers from the far-off valley
of the Frome; sly, whimsical dairymen from the rich
pastures of the Stour; and, moving among them all, slow-voiced
and slow-footed, but with an infinite zest for
enjoyment, the local rustic labourers that tilled the heavy
fields watered by the Lunt.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two men pushed their way back to the taut vibrating
rope, beyond which the driving-contest was now proceeding;
and as they rested there, Wolf’s mind felt
liberated from all its agitations, and he drank in the scene
before him with unruffled delight. The peculiar smells
that came to his nostrils—leather, and straw, and horse-dung,
and tobacco-smoke, and cider-sour human breath,
and paint, and tar, and half-devoured apples—were all
caught up and overpowered by one grand dominant
odour, the unique smell of the trodden grass of a fair-field.
Let the sun shine as it would from the cold blue
heaven! Let the chariots of white clouds race as they
pleased under that airy tent! It was from the solid ground
under human feet, under equine hooves, that this Dorsetshire
world gave forth its autochthonous essence, its
bitter-sweet, rank, harsh, terrestrial sweat, comforting
beyond conscious knowledge to the heart of man and
beast.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Nothing could have been more symbolic of the inmost
nature of that countryside than the humorous gravity
with which these lean yeomen and plump farmers drove
their brightly painted gigs and high dog-carts round that
hoof-trodden paddock! The obvious reciprocity between
the men who drove and the animals driven, the magnetic
currents of sympathy between the persons looking on and
the persons showing off, the way the whole scene was
characterized by something casual, non-official, nonchalant—all
this produced an effect that only England, and
perhaps only that portion of England, could have brought
into being. Behind Wolf and his companion surged a
pushing, jostling, heterogeneous crowd, giving vent to a
low, monotonous murmur; and behind them again could
be heard the raucous cries and clangings and whistlings
from the noisy whirligigs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf could make out, here and there among the people
round him, the well-known straw-hats—manufactured by
Mr. Albert Smith—of the boys of Ramsgard School.
“They must be having a ‘half’ today,” he thought; and
his mind ran upon the various queer, unathletic, unpopular
boys among the rest, who must be feeling, just
then, so indescribably thankful for this blessed interlude
in their hateful life! The thought of the unknown, undiscovered
bullies that probably existed in Ramsgard School
at that very moment made him feel sick at the pit of his
stomach. “I put my curse on them,” he thought. “If I
have a vestige of occult power I put my curse upon
them!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A short, stocky man, with powerful wrists, driving a
lively but not particularly handsome horse, passed them
at that moment inside the paddock. Wolf was wondering
why the voices round him were discreetly lowered as this
person trolled by, when he noted that the man exchanged
a familiar nod with Mr. Urquhart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not a bad turnout for a Lovelace,” muttered this latter,
when the equipage had passed; “but they never can quite
do it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once again Wolf felt a prick of shame at the curious
interest which this occurrence excited in him. What was
Lord Lovelace to him? He glanced furtively at the squire
of King’s Barton. The man’s baggy eye-wrinkles had, just
then, a look that was almost saurian. From one corner
of his twitching mouth a trickle of saliva descended,
towards which a small fly persistently darted.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf turned away his eyes. The magic of the scene had
completely vanished. The smell of the trodden earth was
stale in his nostrils. A loathing of the whole spectacle
of life took possession of him. And under his breath he
repealed that strange classical lament, a tag in his memory
from his school-days, a mere catchword now; but it
gave him a certain relief to pronounce the queer-sounding
syllables.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ailinon! Ailinon!” he muttered to himself, as he
leaned his stomach against that vibrant rope. “Ailinon!
Ailinon!” And the very utterance of this tragic cry from
the old Greek dramas soothed his mind as if it had been
a talisman. But the disgust he felt at the pressure of
things at that moment extended itself to this whole fair-ground,
extended itself even to the prospect of seeing
Gerda again. “How can I face her in the midst of all
this?” he thought; and he recalled the outline of his
mother’s profile, so contemptuously lifted towards Albert
Smith. “What will she think of the Torp family?” he
said to himself, in miserable discomfort.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Struggling against this wretched mood, he straightened
his back and clutched the rope with both his hands.
Savagely he tried to summon up out of the depths of
his spirit some current of defiant magnetism. But the
presence of Mr. Urquhart, taciturn and pensive though
the squire had become, seemed to cut off all help from
these furtive resources.</p>

<p class='pindent'>So he sought to steady himself by pure reason.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“After all,” he argued, “those gulfs of watery blue
up there are such an unthinkable background to all this,
that they .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that they .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a trickle of saliva more
or less .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a woman’s profile more or less .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” And
then, as he watched those painted gigs come swinging
once more round the enclosure, and heard the exclamations
of malicious delight, as a chestnut-coloured mare
showed a vicious tendency to back her driver against
the rope, a sense of terrified loneliness came upon him.
What could Gerda, or his mother, or anyone else—man
or woman—really feel toward him so that this loneliness
should be eased? Emptiness leered at him, emptiness
yawned at him, out of that watery blue; and what pointed
spikes of misunderstanding he had to throw himself upon
before this bustling day was over!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He ran his fingers along the swaying rope, sticky from
the innumerable human hands that had clutched it. His
mind seemed to hover above the form of Gerda and above
the form of his mother, as if it had been a floating mist
gathered about two sundered headlands. That familiar
grey head, with those mocking brown eyes, and this other,
this new strange head, with its sea-grey gaze and its
wild, pursed-up, whistling mouth—what would happen
when he brought them together?</p>

<p class='pindent'>It would mean he would have to leave his mother.
That’s what it would mean. Where was Gerda now, in
this confused medley? She must be somewhere about;
and perhaps Christie, too!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You won’t care if I go off to look for my mother,
Sir?” he found himself saying. And the words quite
startled him, as if he had spoken in his sleep; for he had
made up his mind that he would never speak of his
private affairs to this egoistic gentleman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Eh? What’s that? Tired of the old man, ha? Want
to gad after the petticoats? Well! Take me to the enclosure,
out of this crowd, and I’ll let you go. I suppose
it’s hopeless to find Monk in this hurly? He was to have
come back for me. But Lord! he’s got his own little
affairs, as well as another. There! That’s better. You
needn’t go at a snail’s pace for me. There! That’s all
right. I’ll find Lovelace in the enclosure, I daresay.
He’ll wait to see the cart-horses.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf steered the squire as well as he could through
the jostling mob of people, and left him at the entrance
to the privileged circle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You and I know more about some of these good folks
than they know themselves,” remarked Mr. Urquhart,
grimly. “Our History’ll make ’em sit up a bit; eh?
what? Well, off with ’ee, me boy; and if you want to find
your mother, I’d look for her in the refreshment-tent, if I
were you. Never know’d but one woman who could see a
horse-show out to the end—and she was a tart of Lord
Tintinhull’s. ‘Sack’ they used to call her; and ‘sacked’
she was, at the finish, poor bitch! Well, good luck to ’ee.
We’ll do some solid work tomorrow, please God!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf mumbled some inadequate reply to this and
strode away. What struck him just then was the contrast
between the silky <span class='it'>tone</span> of his employer’s voice and the
toll-pike jocularity of his language. “Neither tone nor
words are the real man,” he thought. “What seething
malice, what fermenting misanthropy, that mask of his
does cover!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Crossing the fair-field to the northward, leaving the
paddock to his left and the whirligigs to his right, Wolf
speedily found his way to the entrance of the great refreshment-tent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The place was packed with people, some taking their
stimulant at little deal-board tables, others eating and
drinking as they stood, others again crowding about the
massive serving-counter at the end of the tent, where
great silvery receptacles, kept hot by oil-flames, were
disgorging into earthenware cups a quality of tea that
seemed to meet the taste alike of the Lovelaces and of
the Torps, so varied were the human types now eagerly
swallowing it!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf speedily became aware that Mr. Urquhart’s jibe
about few petticoats being able to endure a horse-show
to the end was not without justification. About three-quarters
of the persons filling this huge canvas-space
were women.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The first familiar form he encountered as he pushed
his way in was that of Selena Gault. This lady was seated
alone at a small table placed against the canvas-wall,
where she was drinking her tea and eating her bread-and-butter
in sublime indifference to the crowd that surged
about her. Wolf hurried to her, snatched an unoccupied
chair, and sat down at her side.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt, for some reason, a sense of profound physical
exhaustion; and underneath the pleasant badinage with
which he returned his friend’s greetings he found himself
positively clinging to this lonely woman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The lady’s costume, to which she had given a vague
sporting-touch suitable to the occasion, enhanced her
grotesque hideousness. But from her deformed visage
her eyes gleamed such irresistible affection that his
ebbing courage began steadily to revive.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Their complete isolation in the midst of the crowd—for
the people jostling past their table gave them little
heed—soon led Wolf to plunge shamelessly into what was
nearest his heart. Selena Gault’s ghastly upper-lip quivered
perceptibly as he told her of his affair with Gerda
and his resolve to get married without delay.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, she’s here!” she cried. “The child’s here! She
came in with her father a quarter of an hour ago. She
certainly is one of the loveliest girls I’ve ever set eyes
upon. I hadn’t seen her since she’s grown up. I was
amazed at her beauty. Well! You <span class='it'>have</span> made hay while
the sun shone. No! it’s no use! You can’t possibly see her
from where you are. Now turn round and look at me;
and let’s talk about all this, quietly and sensibly. It’s
as serious as it could be; and I don’t know what’s to be
done about it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There’s nothing to be done, I’m afraid, Miss Gault,”
said Wolf gravely, forcing himself to accept the situation;
“nothing except to make some money by hook or by
crook! Do you think if I put the case to Urquhart, he’d
give me a little more? We’re getting on first-rate with the
History.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Never were human eyelids lifted more whimsically
than were those of Wolf’s interlocutor at this mild suggestion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, my dear boy!” she chuckled. “You don’t know
how funny you are. To ask <span class='it'>that</span> man for money to get
married on.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No good, eh?” he murmured. “No, I suppose not.
But you don’t think he’ll show me the door, do you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault shook her head. “If he does, we’ll put all
our wits together and get you something in Ramsgard.
There <span class='it'>are</span> jobs——” she added, thoughtfully puckering
her brows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf, having twice twisted his head back into its
normal position from a hopeless attempt to see further
than a few yards in front of him, felt an irresistible impulse
to reveal to this woman certain rather sinister deductions
that he found he had been involuntarily making
from recent glimpses and hints. Composed originally of
the veriest wisps and wefts of fluctuating suspicion, they
seemed now to have solidified themselves in unabashed
tangibility. What they now amounted to was that Mattie
was not Mr. Smith’s daughter at all but William Solent’s;
and that Olwen, the girl’s little protegée, was actually
the incestuous child of old Malakite, the bookseller, and
of some vanished sister of Christie’s. It was the startling
nature of these conclusions that tempted him to fire
them off point-blank at the lady by his side, whose morbid
receptivity made her a dedicated target for such a
shock.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is it true that I have a sister in this town?” he
enquired boldly, looking straight into Miss Gault’s
eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The appalling upper-lip vibrated like the end of a
tapir’s proboscis, and the grey eyes blinked as if he had
shot off a pistol.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What?” she cried, letting her hands fall heavily upon
her knees, like the hands of a flabbergasted sorceress,
palms downward and fingers outspread. “<span class='it'>What’s</span> that
you’re saying, boy?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I am saying that I’ve come to a shrewd certainty,”
said Wolf firmly, “that Mattie Smith and I have the same
father.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault astonished him by putting her elbows on to
the table and covering her face with her extended fingers;
through which her eyes now regarded him. She was not
weeping—he could see that. Was she laughing at him?
There was something so queer in this gesture, that he felt
an uneasy discomfort. It was as if she had suddenly
turned into a different person, as different from the Miss
Gault he knew, as the new Mattie they were talking about
was different from the one he had met in that Victorian
dining-room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He wished she would remove those fingers and stop
staring at him so discomfortably. When at last she did
so, it was to reveal a countenance whose expression he
was at a loss to read. Her face certainly wasn’t blubbered
with crying; but it was flushed and disturbed. The impression
he really got from it was of something .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
almost indecent!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He glanced furtively round, and, hurriedly extending
his arm, touched one of her wrists.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You must have known I’d find out sooner or later,”
he said. “It doesn’t matter, my knowing, does it? <span class='it'>He</span>
couldn’t mind. He’d be glad, I should think.” And he
gave an awkward little chuckle, as he released her hand
and began fumbling for a cigarette.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had only just succeeded in finding the small packet
for which he was searching, when he caught Miss Gault’s
eyes lit up in excited recognition.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He swung round. Ah! there they were—making their
way straight towards them—the portly figure of Mr.
Torp, with Gerda leaning lightly on his arm!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He did not hesitate a moment, but leaping up from his
chair with an incoherent apology to his companion, he
advanced to meet them, his heart beating fast, but his
brain in full command of the situation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda flushed crimson when she saw him, disengaged
her arm from her father’s, and, coming to
meet him with charming impetuosity, held out her
hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was dressed in plain navy-blue serge, and wore a
dark, soft hat low down over her fair hair. This unassuming
attire heightened her beauty; and the embarrassed,
yet illuminated look with which she greeted
her lover, brought back to his mind so vividly the
events of yesterday, that for a moment he was struck
with a kind of dizziness that reduced everyone in that
crowded tent to a floating and eddying mist.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He caught at her hand without a word and held it
tightly for a moment, hurting her a little.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He soon dropped it, however, and said very hurriedly
and quietly: “Gerda .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. forgive me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but I want to
introduce you to my friend, Miss Gault.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda’s eyes must have already encountered those of
that lady, for he saw her face stiffen to a conventional
and rather strained smile. But at this moment Mr. Torp
intervened, coming up very close to Wolf and touching
the latter’s hand with his plump finger before he could
lift it to greet him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So you and darter have fixed it up, have ’ee?” he
whispered, in a confidential, almost funereal tone. “Don’t
’ee be fretted about I nor the missus, Mister. Us be glad
in advance, I tell ’ee; and so it be.” He caught hold of
Wolf’s sleeve and put his face close to his face, while
Wolf, with a sidelong glance, became aware that Miss
Gault had approached them and had been met half-way
by Gerda.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tis they wimming’s whimsies what us have got to
mind, hasn’t?” whispered Mr. Torp. “What they do
reckon’ll happen to we, ’tis what <span class='it'>will</span> happen to we,
looks so! Don’t ’ee take on, Mister, about us being poor
folks like. Darter’s different from we and allus has been,
since her were a babe. She’s had grand courtiers ere now,
though I shouldn’t say it. But Gerdie be a good girl,
though turble lazy about house. Her mother once did
think it ’ud be young Bob Weevil what ’ud get her; but
I knewed a thing or two beyond that, I did! I knewed
she were one for the gentry, as you might say. ’Twere
barn in her, I reckon! I be a climbing man, me wone
self. It’s like enough she gets it from I!” And before he
withdrew his rubicund face to a discreet distance, the
stone-cutter gave him a shrewd wink.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was then that Miss Gault took the opportunity of
bringing Gerda up to them. She had evidently said something
very gracious to the girl; for Gerda’s quaint society-manner
had left her, and she looked pleased, though a
little bewildered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We’ve made friends already,” said Miss Gault to
Wolf, “and I’ve told her I knew her well by sight. How
do you do, Mr. Torp! I was telling Mr. Solent that I
knew your daughter already, though I’ve never spoken to
her; but she’s not a young lady one can forget!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>What Mr. Torp’s reply to this was Wolf did not
hear. Aware that the situation had arranged itself, he
found as he kept looking at Gerda’s face, as she listened
to Miss Gault and her father, that he was beginning
to grow nervously hostile to all these explanations. Why
couldn’t he and Gerda go straight off now, out of this
hurly-burly, out anywhere .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so as to be at peace and
alone?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, good-bye,” Gerda was saying. “Perhaps we’ll
see you again later; but Father and I haven’t half gone
the round yet, have we, Father?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gone the round! I should think us hadn’t!” said Mr.
Torp. “Bain’t what used to be, this here fair! I do mind
when ’twere so thick wi’ gipoos and such-like, that a
person could scarce move. But Gerdie and I will see
summat, don’t ’ee fear! They whirligigs .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. why there
ain’t a blessed season since her was a mommet that we
ain’t rid in they things; is there, my chuck?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, there isn’t, Father. Good-bye, Miss Gault!” she
added, with a straight, confiding, grateful glance at her
friend’s friend. “I’ll be at home all tomorrow afternoon,
Wolf,” she murmured, as she smoothed out her gloves
and buttoned her jacket.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Torp caught the word. “So she <span class='it'>shall</span> be!” he
cried emphatically. “I be a turble stern man, for ordering
they to do what they’ve set their hearts on doing!
Well, good-bye to ’ee, Sir! Good-bye to ’ee, Marm! If
all and sundry here were to fling at they coceenuts, there’d
be few left, I reckon!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Watching that quaintly assorted couple moving away
out of the tent, Wolf felt a glow of almost conceited
satisfaction in the discovery that whatever vein of snobbishness
it was in him that had made so much of Mr.
Urquhart’s clothes and Lord Lovelace’s appearance, it
fell away completely where Gerda was concerned. “I’m
glad the old man is as he is!” he thought, as his eyes
followed them into the open air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s sit down again, shall we?” he said to Miss
Gault.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His spirits were a little dashed, however, when he regarded
the lady opposite him, as they resumed their
seats; for her face seemed to have grown stiff and somewhat
remote.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This is very serious,” she said gravely. And then,
with an almost plaintive tone, “Why is it that men are
so ridiculous?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But I thought you liked her, Miss Gault! You were
so especially sweet to her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She sighed and gave him a glance that seemed to say
irritably, “And to cap everything you are an incredible
fool!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You <span class='it'>did</span> like her, didn’t you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So childish that they think of nothing .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>nothing</span>
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. when their desire is aroused.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why is it so serious, Miss Gault?” he said. And then
he added rather maliciously, “My mother would see in a
second how refined she is!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault lifted her eyebrows. “I’m not only thinking
of your mother,” she said. “There’s no reason, that I
know of, why I should fuss about <span class='it'>her</span>. I’m thinking of
you and the girl herself, and—and of <span class='it'>all</span> your friends.
Listen, boy”—and she bent on him one of the most tender
and reproachful looks he had ever seen—“all this is
pure madness—selfish, greedy madness! You <span class='it'>can’t</span> make
a girl like that happy—no! not for half a year! Good
heavens, child, you’re as blind as a—— You’re as selfish
as one of my cats! It’s the girl I’m thinking of, I tell
you. You’ll make her miserable, you and your mother.
She’s sweet to look at; but Wolf, Wolf! she and you
will talk completely different languages! You can’t do
these things—not in <span class='it'>our</span> country, anyhow. I’ve seen it
again and again—these things bring misery—just misery.
And how are you going to support her, I’d like to
know?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She has indeed a different language,” cried Wolf,
irrelevantly; and his mind reverted to the blackbird of
Poll’s Camp. And then, as he saw her face droop wearily
and her fingers tap the table: “Why did you take it all
so nicely just now. Why did you talk of getting me work
in Ramsgard?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She made no reply to this. But after a moment she
burst out: “Your father would laugh at you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. he
would! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. He’d just laugh at you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, we’d better not talk of it any more,” said Wolf
sulkily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He cast about in the depths of his consciousness, however,
with the vindictiveness of defeat, for some line of
attack that would disturb and agitate her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Miss Gault,” he began, while with her gaze fixed upon
vacancy she stared through him and past him into the interior
of the great tent, “do you mind if I ask you a
direct question? I know that Mattie Smith is my father’s
child; but what I want to ask you now is—whose child
is Olwen?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A faint brownish flush ran like a stream of muddy
water beneath the surface of the skin of her face. She
bent her head over the table; and like a great ruffled
bird, in a cage, that has been shaken from the top, she
began picking up and lifting to her mouth every crumb
of bread in sight. Then, with a shaky hand, she poured
some spilt drops of cold tea from her saucer into her
cup.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What I want to know,” repeated Wolf, “is why my
sister Mattie has this child Olwen to look after. Is she
a foundling? Is she adopted? Where did she spring
from?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the daughter of the late headmaster of Ramsgard
School remained obstinately silent. She folded her hands
mechanically over the heavy teacup and sat straight in
her chair, staring into her lap like an image of Atropos.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t you want to tell me, Miss Gault? Is it something
you <span class='it'>can’t</span> tell me?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Still the lady remained silent, her fingers tightly
clenched over the cup.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I knew there was something queer from the start,”
he went on. “What’s the matter with you all? Who <span class='it'>is</span>
this child?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then very slowly Miss Gault rose to her feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come out into the air,” she said brusquely. “I can’t
talk to you here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They made their way together out of the tent; but they
had hardly gone a stone’s throw into the cold March sunshine,
when they encountered, without a possibility of
retreat or evasion, Mrs. Solent and Mr. Smith advancing
resolutely and blamelessly towards the place they
were quitting.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The hatter of Ramsgard School looked pinched and
withered in the hard, glaring light. Wolf received a sudden,
inexplicable inkling that the man was wretchedly
miserable. The look he got from him as they approached
seemed grey with weariness. Mrs. Solent was, however,
talking gaily. Her brown eyes were shining with mischief.
Her cheeks were flushed. And now, at the very
moment of salutation, he could see that proud face toss
its chin and that sturdy, well-dressed figure gather itself
together for battle. Once more it came over him with
a queer kind of remorse, as if he were responsible for
it: “She’s had no life at all; and she’s made for great,
stirring events!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But it was many days before he forgot the manner in
which those two ancient rivals faced each other. It had,
this encounter between them, the queer effect upon him
of making him recall, as he had once or twice already
in Dorsetshire, that passage in “Hamlet” where the ghost
cries out from beneath the earth. A piece of horse-dung
at his feet, as he instinctively looked away while the
two came together, grew large and white and round.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He can’t have a shred of flesh left on him down
there,” he thought to himself, with a kind of sullen anger
against both the women. But what puzzled him now
was that Miss Gault did not rise to the occasion as he
had supposed she would have done. To his own personal
taste she looked more formidable in her black satin
gown than his mother did in her finery; but it was clear
to him, as he watched them shaking hands, that his
mother’s spirit was poised and adjusted to the nicest
point of the encounter, whereas Miss Gault’s inmost being
just then seemed disorganized, disjointed, helpless,
unwieldy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That they shook hands at all, he could see, was owing
to his mother. Miss Gault’s hands hung down at her sides,
like the hands of a large, stuffed doll that has been set
up with difficulty in an erect position. And they remained
like this until Mrs. Solent’s arm had been extended
for quite a perceptible passage of time. When
Selena <span class='it'>did</span> raise her wrist and take her enemy’s fingers,
it was to retain them all the while the two were speaking.
But Mrs. Solent told Wolf afterwards that there was no
warmth or life in that cold pressure.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, Selena, so it’s really you! And I couldn’t have
believed there’d be so little change. You are at your old
tricks again, I see, running off with my son!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope you are well, Ann,” said Miss Gault. “You
look as handsome as ever.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d look handsomer still, if my son wasn’t so unambitious
and lazy,” replied the other, giving Wolf a
glance of glowing possessiveness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Men can be too ambitious, Ann,” said Miss Gault
slowly, speaking as if she were in some kind of trance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We passed a <span class='it'>really</span> pretty girl a minute or two ago,”
cried Mrs. Solent suddenly; “and Albert here says he
knows who she is. You ought to go over to the roundabouts,
Wolf, and try and find her! She was with a
labouring-man of some sort, a stocky plump little man;
but she was pretty as a picture!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you mean that Dorset labourers <span class='it'>sell</span> their daughters,
Mother? Or do you mean that all beauty can be
had for the asking? All right; I’ll hunt for her through
all the tents!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt himself speaking in such a strained, queer
voice that he was not surprised to observe Miss Gault
glancing nervously at Mrs. Solent to see if she had detected
it. But Mrs. Solent was too excited just then to
notice so slight a thing as a change of tone. As he spoke
with his mother in this way about Gerda, something
seemed to rise up in his throat that was like a serpent
of fury. He rebelled against the look of his mother’s
face, the proud outline of her scornful profile. “I am
glad .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I am glad .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” he said to himself, “that
Gerda <span class='it'>isn’t</span> a lady, and that her father <span class='it'>is</span> a stone-cutter!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And it came over him that it was an imbecility that
any human soul should have the power over another soul
that his mother had over him. As he looked at her now,
he was aware of an angry revolt at the massive resistance
which her personality offered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It did not make it easier for him at this moment
that he recognized clearly enough that the very strength
in his mother which had been such security to him in
his childhood was the thing now with which he had to
struggle to gain his liberty—that protective, maternal
strength, the most formidable of all psychic forces!</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was like a witch—his mother—on the wrong side
in the fairy-story of life. She was on the side of fate
against chance, and of destiny against random fortune.
“I don’t care how she feels when I tell her about Gerda,”
he said to himself; and in a flash, looking all the while
at his mother’s dress, he thought of the yielded loveliness
of Gerda’s body, and he decided that he would
shake off this resistance without the least remorse.
“Shake it off! Pass over it; disregard it!” he said to
himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I shall come and see you, Selena, whether you like
it or not,” his mother was now saying. “After twenty-five
years people as old as we are ought to be sensible,
oughtn’t we, Mr. Smith?” she added.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mr. Smith had managed to remove himself a pace
or two from their company, under cover of a sudden
interest in a torn and flapping “Western Gazette,” which
he proceeded to push into a trampled mole-hill with the
end of his stick.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Solent glanced at her son shrewdly and scrutinizingly.
“You look as if you were enjoying yourself, I
<span class='it'>must</span> say! What’s come over you? Are you wishing yourself
back in London? Well, come on, Albert Smith!
I’m longing for a cup of tea. These people have had
theirs.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was already carrying off her companion, after a
nod to Miss Gault, which was received without a sign of
response, when Wolf stopped her. “Where shall we meet,
Mother, when you’re ready to go?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, anywhere, child! We can’t lose ourselves here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Say over there, then? By the roundabouts, in about
an hour?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right; very good! Mr. Smith shall escort me there
when we’ve had our tea. It’s strange, Albert, isn’t it,
that in this place of my whole married life, you’re the
only friend I’ve got left?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was aware of an expression in her brown eyes,
a droop of her straight shoulders, that made him realize
that there were strange emotions stirring under the surface
of that airy manner.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The roundabouts, then!” he repeated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right—in an hour or so!” she flung back. “And
why don’t you and Selena have a turn at the swings?”
she added, as she went off.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her disappearance seemed to make no difference to
Selena Gault. In absolute immobility the poor lady remained
standing there, staring at the grass. It was as if
she’d put her foot upon an adder that struck her with
sudden paralysis, so that at a touch she would topple
over and fall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf came close to her. “Don’t worry about my
mother, Miss Gault, darling,” he whispered earnestly.
“She’s not as flippant as she sounds .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. really she’s
not! She’s like that with everyone. She’s like that with
me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault looked at him as if his words meant nothing.
Her vacant stare seemed to be fixed on something
at a remote distance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know; I quite understand,” she murmured; and
her hands, coming, as it were, slowly to life, began to
pick at the little cloth buttons of the braided jacket she
wore over her satin gown. The stiffness of these old-fashioned
garments seemed to hold her up. Without
their support it looked as if she would have fallen down
just where she was—close to the newspaper buried
through the nervousness of Mr. Smith!</p>

<p class='pindent'>She seemed to Wolf, as he stood helplessly before her,
like a classic image of outrage in grotesque modern
clothes. “She’s like an elderly Io,” he thought, “driven
mad by the gadfly of the goddess.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dear Miss Gault! Don’t you worry about it any more!
I swear to you she isn’t as malicious as she seems. You
must remember that all this isn’t as easy for her as she
makes out. She’s hard; but she can be really magnanimous
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you’ll see! She doesn’t realize people’s feelings,
that’s what it is. She was the same about Gerda.
Fancy her noticing her like that!” In his desire to soothe
his companion he seized one of the black-gloved hands.
As he did so he looked round nervously; for he began
to be aware that various persons among the groups who
passed them stopped to stare at her perturbed figure.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But his touch brought a flood of colour to the woman’s
swarthy cheeks. She clasped his hand tightly with both
her own, holding it for a moment before she let it fall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t help it, boy,” she said in a low tone. “Seeing
her brings it all back.” She paused for a moment. “No
one else ever treated me as a woman,” she added, her
mouth twitching.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf wrinkled his bushy eyebrows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You must let me be as fond of you as he was,” he
muttered. “You must look after me as you looked after
him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She nodded and smiled a little at that, rearranged the
great black hat upon her head, and, after a moment’s
hesitation, placed her hand on his arm. “Come,” she
said, “let’s go to the roundabouts.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They moved slowly together across the field. It occurred
to him now that he could distract her mind and
at the same time satisfy his own curiosity by renewing
their interrupted conversation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t want to tease you with questions,” he began
presently. “But you promised you’d tell me—you know?—about
Mattie and Olwen.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s not easy, boy,” said Miss Gault with a sigh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know it isn’t. That’s why I want <span class='it'>you</span> to tell me and
not anyone else.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She walked by his side in silence for a while, evidently
collecting her thoughts. “It’s the sort of thing one finds
so difficult to tell,” she said, looking guardedly round
them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well! Let me tell <span class='it'>you</span>!” he retorted, “and you correct
me, if I’m wrong.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault nodded gravely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mattie’s my father’s child,” he muttered in a low,
clear voice, “and Olwen is——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault had managed to turn her face so far away
from him that he couldn’t see her expression.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who told you all this, boy? Who told you?” she interrupted,
in such a peevish tone that two solemn-faced
members of the Sixth Form of the School, with blue
ribbons round their straw-hats and sticks in their hands,
glanced furtively at her as they passed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Olwen’s father was old Malakite,” Wolf went on;
“and Olwen’s mother was Christie Malakite’s sister.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault still kept her face removed from his steady
gaze.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aren’t I right?” he repeated. “But you needn’t tell
me. I <span class='it'>know</span> I am right.” He paused, and they continued
to cross the field.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s become of the mother?” he continued. “Is she
still alive?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault did turn at this.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Australia,” she whispered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Alive or dead?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She almost shouted her reply to this, as if with a
spasm of savage relief.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dead!” she cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf held his peace for a moment or two, while his
brain worked at top speed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What Christie must have gone through!” he murmured
audibly, but in a tone as if talking to himself
rather than to her. “What she must have gone through!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault’s comment upon this was drowned by the
brazen noise issuing from the engine of one of the
roundabouts which they were now approaching.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What did you say?” he shouted in her ear.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I said that Christie Malakite has no heart!” cried
Miss Gault; and her voice was almost as harsh as the
raucous whistle that saluted them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stopped at this, and they both stood motionless,
looking at each other covertly, while a magnetic current
of inexplicable antagonism flickered between them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It wasn’t <span class='it'>her</span> he loved!” Miss Gault shouted suddenly—so
suddenly that Wolf moved backwards, as if
she had lifted her hand to hit him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who didn’t love whom?” he vociferated in response;
while two small boys of the Ramsgard Preparatory
School nudged each other and peered at them inquisitively.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What are you staring for? <span class='it'>Urchins!</span>” cried Miss
Gault.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All the same they’re nice boys,” she muttered. “Look!
I’ve hurt their feelings now; and they really <span class='it'>are</span> very
polite. Here, children, come here!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two little boys, their heads covered with enormous
and very new examples of the art of Mr. Albert
Smith, pretended not to hear her appeal. They remained
in fixed contemplation of a counter of glaring cakes
and sweets.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come here, you two!” repeated the lady.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They did, at that, sheepishly turn round and begin
moving towards her, with an air as if it were a complete
accident that their feet carried them in that particular
direction rather than in any other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I won’t hurt you,” she said, as softly as she could
in the midst of the terrific noise that whirled round
them. “What are your names, my dears?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stepney Major,” murmured one of the little
boys.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Trelawney Minor,” gasped the other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, Stepney Major and Trelawney Minor, here’s
half-a-crown for you. Only, when you next meet queer-looking
people at the Fair, don’t stare at them as if
they were part of the Show.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When the two little boys had decamped, radiantly
reverential, Miss Gault turned to Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Didn’t they take off their hats prettily? They <span class='it'>do</span> bring
’em up well. Little gentlemen they are!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She seemed glad of the interruption. But Wolf began
speaking again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s that, boy?” she rejoined. “Terrible, this
noise! Isn’t it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Miss Gault!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You needn’t shout, Wolf. I can hear you. There .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
like that .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that’s better!” And she shifted her position.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who didn’t love whom? We were talking of the Malakites.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My dear boy”—and, as she spoke, a smile of the
most complicated humour came into her strange countenance,
transforming it into something almost beautiful—“my
dear boy, I wasn’t talking of the Malakites! I
was talking of your father and Lorna Smith.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mattie’s mother, eh? But why did you say—oh, damn
that noise!—that Christie had no heart?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault stared at him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Haven’t you seen her? Didn’t you see what she was?
Reading the books of that old wretch, keeping house for
that old wretch? How can she look the man in the face,
I should like to know? They tell me Olwen can’t bear
the sight of her; and I don’t wonder.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But Miss Gault, my dear Miss Gault, what has Christie
done? I should think she was the one most to be
pitied.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf bent his shaggy eyebrows almost fiercely upon
his companion; and after a moment’s encounter with his
gaze Miss Gault glanced away and contemplated the
sweet-stall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What has Christie Malakite done to <span class='it'>you</span>?” asked
Wolf sternly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, if you must have it, boy, you <span class='it'>shall</span> have it! Listen.
I went over there when all that trouble happened.
I had some sort of official position; and things like this,
unspeakable things like this, were what I had to deal
with. The Society sent me, in fact.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf lifted his eyebrows very high at this. He began
to detect an aspect of Miss Selena Gault’s character that
hitherto had been concealed from him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What society?” he asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The Society for the Care of Delinquent Girls. And I
found Miss Christie, let me tell you, both obstinate and
impertinent. She actually defended that abominable old
wretch! She wanted to keep Olwen in their house. Fortunately
the child can’t bear the sight of her .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or of
that old monster either. It’s instinct, I expect.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It doesn’t happen to be anything you or Mattie may
have let fall?” shouted Wolf in her ear.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, you’re defending them now!” Miss Gault retorted,
her face dark with anger. “If you knew all, boy,
you wouldn’t dare!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt extreme discomfort and distaste.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What else <span class='it'>is</span> there for me to know, Miss Gault?” he
demanded aloud and in a quieter voice; for there had
come a pause in the whistling of the engine.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That old man was one of the most evil influences in
your father’s life.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Does Mattie know that?” he enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, Mattie!” she cried contemptuously. “Mattie
knows just as much as we’ve considered it wise to tell
her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who are we?” said Wolf drily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Smith and myself. Don’t you see, boy, we had
to make ourselves responsible <span class='it'>to the police</span> for Olwen’s
bringing up? It’s been an unholy business, the whole
affair! It gives me a kind of nausea to talk about it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf found that his protective instincts were thoroughly
aroused by this time; and Miss Gault’s figure
assumed an unattractive shape.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s this accursed sex-suppression,” he said to himself;
and he suddenly thought with immense relief of his
mother, and of her scandalously light touch in the presence
of every conceivable human obliquity. “I must be
cautious,” he said to himself. “I mustn’t show my hand.
But who would have thought she was like this!” He
looked Miss Gault straight in the face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Does Mr. Urquhart know the history of my sister and
the history of Olwen?” he asked abruptly, leaning so
heavily on his stick that it sank deep into the turf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A flicker of relief crossed the woman’s agitated features.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Urquhart? Oh, you may be sure he has <span class='it'>his</span> version,
just as all the neighbourhood has! It’s been the
great scandal of the country.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The use of this particular word made Wolf explode.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Greater than the doings of Mattie’s father?” he
rapped out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He regretted his maliciousness as soon as the words
were uttered. That scene in the cemetery came back to
his mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I didn’t mean that, dear Miss Gault!” he cried, pulling
his stick violently out of the sod. But she had turned
her face away from him, and for a little while they stood
silently there, side by side, while the crowd jostled them
and the engine renewed its whistling. At last she did
turn round, and her face was sad and gentle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We won’t quarrel, will we, Wolf?” she murmured,
bending close to his ear so that he shouldn’t lose her
words. It was the first time she had dropped that rather
annoying “boy”; and the use of his name did much to
restore his good-temper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all right,” he whispered back. “Let’s go on now,
eh?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The merry-go-round in front of which they had passed
was isolated from the rest. They proceeded to push their
way through the crowds towards the next one, which was
some three hundred yards further on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly they saw before them the anxious little
figure of Mrs. Otter, leaning on Darnley’s arm; while
Jason, his melancholy gaze surveying the scene as if he
were a Gaulish captive in a Roman triumph, was standing
apart, like one who had no earthly link with his relations—or
with anyone else.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt singularly disinclined to cope with these
people at that moment. He had received of late so many
contradictory impressions, that his brain felt like an
overcrowded stage. But he gathered his wits together as
well as he could, and for a while they all five stood talking
rather wearily, exchanging commonplaces as if they
had been at a garden-party rather than a fair.</p>

<p class='pindent'>By degrees Wolf managed to edge away from the two
ladies, who were listening to Darnley’s criticism of the
horse-show, and began to exchange more piquant remarks
with the dilapidated poet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you see our clergyman?” said Jason.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Valley?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man nodded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Certainly I did. I talked to him when I first got
here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Making a fool of himself as usual——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come, Mr. Otter——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I daresay it’s no affair of ours. It’s best to
mind one’s own business. That’s what God’s so good at
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. minding His own business! Seen Urquhart anywhere?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I was with him just now. Monk drove him over.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason Otter’s face expressed panic.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is <span class='it'>that</span> man here?” he whispered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had already remarked how oddly Jason’s fits of
mortal terror assorted with the monumental dignity of
his grim and massive countenance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why not? I understand he gave a lift to your old
Mrs. Stone. You ought to be grateful to him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Urquhart pays him to spy on me, and one day he’ll
beat me like a black dog!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Incredible, Mr. Otter!” It became more and more
difficult for Wolf to take seriously the man’s morbid
timorousness. It was impossible to make sport of him;
but he could not prevent a faint vein of raillery from
entering into his reply. “He looks a powerfully built
fellow.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I tell you this, Solent, I tell you this”—and Jason
clutched Wolf’s arm and glanced round to make sure
that the others were out of hearing—“one day I shall be
picked up unconscious in a ditch, beaten half-dead by
that man!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf’s mind had wandered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“By the way, Mr. Otter, if you ever want to sell that
Hindoo idol of yours, I’ll buy it from you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The poet stared at him blankly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll give five times whatever it cost you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It cost me a pound,” said Jason grimly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Very well; I’ll buy it for five pounds. Is that
agreed?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason pondered a little.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why do you want that thing? To bury it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Perhaps that’s it! How discerning you are!” And
Wolf smiled genially at him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Very well, I’ll sell it to you.” He paused for a moment.
“And if you could let me have that five pounds
tomorrow, I should be very much obliged.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good Lord!” thought Wolf to himself. “I’ve done it
now! Probably they keep the poor wretch without a
penny, to stop him from drinking.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m not sure that I can manage it tomorrow,” he said
affably, “but you shall have it, Mr. Otter; and I’m sure
I’m very grateful to you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shall you bury it?” whispered Jason again, in a
voice as sly and furtive as a wicked schoolboy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t want <span class='it'>you</span> to have it any longer, anyhow,” said
Wolf laughing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason put his hand to his mouth and chuckled.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“By the way,” Wolf went on, “I’ve never yet read a
line of your poetry, Mr. Otter.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The words were no sooner out of his mouth than
he stared at the man in bewildered amazement. It was
as if a mask had fallen from his face, revealing a totally
different human countenance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Will you really read something? Will you really?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tone in which he said this was so childlike in its
eagerness that Wolf felt a sudden unexpected tenderness
for the queer man, quite different from his previous
amused indulgence. “How they must have outraged his
life-illusion among them all!” he thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But your mother adores your poetry; and your
brother likes it too, doesn’t he?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason gave him one deep, slow, penetrating look that
was like the opening of a sluice-gate.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My mother .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. my brother .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” And the man
shrugged his shoulders as if Wolf had referred to the
activities of water-flies in relation to human affairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They don’t understand it, you mean? They don’t get
its significance, for all their devotion? Well, I think I
realize what you suffer from. But I don’t suppose I shall
understand it either.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve written lately .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very lately .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. last night,
in fact—a poem to him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To whom?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to Mukalog.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf wrinkled his eyebrows and stared intently at
him for a moment. “You’ll be altogether happier when
you’ve sold that thing to me, Mr. Otter,” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’d like to bury him in your garden,” Jason muttered.
And then quite unexpectedly he smiled so disarmingly
that Wolf once again experienced that wave of
affection.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I expect lots of people wish I were dead,” he added,
with a queer chuckle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t wish you were dead,” said Wolf, looking into
his eyes. “But I wish you <span class='it'>would</span> let me throw away that
demon!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A gleam of nervous irritation flashed from Jason’s
eyes, and his upper lip trembled.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s myself!” he murmured. “He’s what I am!” Then
after a pause he jerked his thumb towards his brother.
“Darnley’s a funny one,” he whispered, nudging Wolf’s
arm. “Listen to him talking to the ladies! He ought to
have been a member of Parliament. He loves to behave
like a grand gentleman.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He <span class='it'>is</span> a grand gentleman!” said Wolf drily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And as for that great bully of yours, Squire Urquhart,”
Jason went on, raising his voice, “<span class='it'>he’ll</span> die
without any demon to help him. <span class='it'>He’s on that road
now!</span>”</p>

<p class='pindent'>These last words were uttered with such concentrated
vindictiveness that Wolf opened his eyes wide.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you see how he looked,” went on Jason, “when
those stallions passed him? He had to hang on to the
rope to keep himself from falling.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I can tell you
what crossed his mind then!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What?” enquired Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To throw himself under their hooves! To be trodden
into the ground by fifty stallions!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Are ye talking of stallions, gentlemen?” said a well-known
voice; and Roger Monk, accompanied by the
waiter of the Lovelace Hotel, stood before them, touching
his hat politely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley and Miss Gault moved forward now, and Mrs.
Otter began asking Monk about Dimity Stone and thanking
him for picking up the old woman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on,” whispered Jason in Wolf’s ear. “Let’s
clear out of this! You see what <span class='it'>he</span> is .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a great lubberly
catchpole, not fit for anything except horse-racing!
He’s got rid of Dimity and joined up with that waiter
with the idea of annoying someone. He wouldn’t dare to
insult anyone alone; but with that sly dog of a waiter—you
know what waiters are——” He paused and
glanced back furtively at his mother and at the two
serving-men. “I’d like,” he added, “to see Valley well
fooled by those rascals. He’d have to go home alone
then; and a good thing, too!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ve got your knife into us all, Mr. Otter,” said
Wolf slowly. “And I think it’s a mistake. It’s a waste of
energy to hate people at the rate you do.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Jason’s attention was still so absorbed in watching
Monk and the waiter, that he listened to him only with
half an ear; and, indeed, shortly afterwards he shuffled
off with barely a word of farewell.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Shrugging his shoulders, under this rebuff, Wolf strode
away in pursuit of Darnley and Miss Gault.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he reached these two, he held out his hand and
raised his hat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think I’ll leave you now in Mr. Otter’s care,” he
said to Miss Gault. “It’s about time I began to look for
my mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Selena appeared a little disconcerted at his abrupt departure,
but Darnley gave him his usual gentle and indulgent
smile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You always seem to bring me luck, Solent,” he said.
“But <span class='it'>au revoir</span>! We may meet on the road; for I expect
<span class='it'>my</span> mother will be tired of this soon.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf shogged off by himself; and as soon as the crowd
concealed him from the sight of his friends, he began
waving his stick in the air. This was an old trick of his,
and he invariably gave way to it when, after any prolonged
period of human intercourse, he found himself
alone and in the open.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He made his way rapidly to the extreme western corner
of the great fair-field, where there were certain small
swings patronized rather by children than by grown-up
people.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he threaded his way through all those excitable
West Country folk he did his best to reduce to some sort
of order the various jolts and jars he had received. So
many confused impressions besieged his consciousness
that he wished devoutly he were going to return to King’s
Barton on foot instead of driving.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His thoughts became complicated just at this moment
by the teasing necessity of finding some place among
those tents where he could make water. Drifting about
with this in view, he found himself recalling all manner
of former occasions when he had been driven to this kind
of search. It took him so long to find what he wanted, that
when he <span class='it'>had</span> found it and had re-emerged into the sunshine,
he experienced an extraordinary heightening of
his spirits.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The acrid, ammoniacal smell of that casual retreat
brought back to his mind the public lavatory on the
esplanade at Weymouth, into which, from the sun-warmed
sands, he used to descend by a flight of spittle-stained
steps. This memory, combined with an access
of pervading physical comfort, drew his mind like a magnet
toward his secretive mystical vice. Once more, as
he gave himself up to this psychic abandonment, he felt
as if he were engaged in some mysterious world-conflict,
where the good and the evil ranged themselves on opposite
sides.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rubbed his hands together in the old reckless way,
as he walked along; and it seemed to him as if all these
new impressions of his took their place in this mysterious
struggle. That ravaged face of the Waterloo steps mingled
its hurt with what Jason, Valley, Christie, were all
suffering; while the sinister magnetism that emanated
from Mr. Urquhart fused its influence with that of Jason’s
idol, and the cruelty of Miss Gault to Christie, and
of his mother to Miss Gault!</p>

<p class='pindent'>When this orgy of mystic emotion passed away, as it
presently did, leaving him as limp and relaxed as if
he had been walking for hours instead of minutes, he
became aware that there were two irritating perplexities
still fretting his mind, like stranded jelly-fish left high
and dry on a bank of pebbles.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found himself steering his consciousness with extreme
care, as he walked along, so as to avoid contact
with these two problems. But, as generally happens, he
had not gone far before he was plunged into both of
them, mingled confusedly together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All about him was the smell of trodden grass, of
horse-dung, of tar, of paint, of cider, of roasted chestnuts,
of boys’ new clothes, of rustic sweat, of girls’ cheap perfumes,
of fried sausages, of brassy machinery, of stale
tobacco; and these accumulated odours seemed to resolve
themselves into one single odour that became a wavering
curtain, behind which these two dangerous thoughts were
moving—moving and stirring the curtain into bulging
folds—as concealed figures might do on a theatre-stage,
between the acts of a play.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The first of these thoughts was about his ill-assorted
parents. He felt as if there were going on in his spirit
an unappeasable rivalry between these two. He felt as if
it were that grinning skull in the cemetery, with his
“Christ! I’ve had a happy life!” that had made him
snatch at Gerda so recklessly, with the express purpose
of separating him from his mother! It was just what
that man would have done had he been alive. How he
would have rejoiced in an irresponsible chance-driven
offspring!</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then, before he had finished untying this knot of
his parents’ hostility, he was plunged into the second
dangerous thought. This was more troubling to his peace
than the other. It was about that grey feather which he
had found in that book of Christie’s! Why did it rouse
such peculiar interest in him, to think of Christie and of
Christie’s fondness for the works of Sir Thomas Browne?
What was Christie to him with her books and her queer
tastes? What stability could there be in his love for
Gerda when this troubling curiosity stirred within him
at the idea of Gerda’s friend?</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he thought of all this, his eyes caught sight of the
golden face of a little dandelion in the midst of the
trodden grass. He touched the edge of its petals rather
wearily with the end of his stick, thinking to himself,
“If I leave it there it’ll probably be trodden by these
people into the mud in a few minutes; and if I pick it
up it’ll be dead before I get home!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He decided to give the dandelion a chance to survive.
“After all, it <span class='it'>may</span> survive,” he thought; “and if it doesn’t—Ailinon!
Ailinon! What does it matter?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Moving on again at random, burdened with perplexities,
he suddenly found himself in the midst of a circle
of children who were gazing in envious rapture at a gaily
decorated swing that was whirling up and down in full,
crowded activity. It was a boat-swing, and the boats
were painted azure and scarlet and olive-green.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And there, among the children in the swing, was Olwen,
and there, by the side of it, watching Olwen swinging,
was Mattie Smith herself! To come bolt-up upon
her like this, in the midst of so many agitating thoughts,
was a shock. He experienced that sort of mental desperation
that one feels when one forces oneself awake from
a dream that grows unendurable. And in his knowledge
that she was his sister he saw her now as a totally different
Mattie. But—what a sad face she had! She was so
nervous about Olwen that he could regard her for
several long seconds unobserved. What heavy ill-complexioned
cheeks! What a disproportioned nose! What
a clouded apathetic brow, and what patient eyes! “She’s
had a pretty hard life,” he thought. “I wonder if she
knows or doesn’t know?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Olwen was the first to catch sight of him; and her excited
waving made Mattie hurriedly glance round.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She recognized him at once, too, and a flood of colour
came into her pale cheeks. Wolf felt a curious embarrassment
as they shook hands; and it was almost a relief
to him to be forced to take his eyes off her in order to
respond to Olwen, who was now waving to him frantically
from her flying seat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The child could not of course stop the machinery of
the swing; and when she saw that he had answered her
signal, she contented herself with just sweeping him into
that rapturous topsy-turvy world—of people, grass,
horses, trees, ruins, and hills—which rose and fell around
her as she rushed through the air!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The cries of the children, the clang of the machinery,
the voices of the showmen, covered Wolf and Mattie with
a protective screen of undisturbed privacy. In the light
of subsequent events they both looked back upon this
moment with peculiar and romantic tenderness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Directly she gave him her hand—even while he still
held it—he had begun to talk to her of their relationship.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve known it since I was fifteen,” she said; “and
I’m twenty-five this month. That was what made it so
awkward when you and your mother came to our house.
<span class='it'>She</span> knows it, of course; and she let me see that she knew
it. But I saw she had kept it from you. Has she told you
about it since? What I <span class='it'>cannot</span> make out is whether Father
knows. He knows about Olwen, of course. In fact, he and
Miss Gault were the ones who took Olwen away from Mr.
Malakite.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She paused, and gave Wolf a quick, furtive look; but
what she saw in his face appeared to reassure her, for
she smiled faintly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all so hard to talk about,” she said in a low
voice. “I’d never have thought I could talk to <span class='it'>you</span> about
it. But it seems easy, now I’m actually doing it! I was
young then, you see .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. only fifteen; and Father and
Miss Gault thought I knew nothing. But I’d heard the
servants talking; and I read about it in the ‘Western Gazette.’
Why do you think it was I wasn’t more shocked
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Wolf?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The hesitancy with which she brought out his name
enchanted him. He snatched at her hand and made a
movement as if he would kiss her; but she glanced hurriedly
at the swing and drew back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m pretty hard to shock, too, Mattie dear,” he said.
“I expect we inherit <span class='it'>that</span>!” he added lightly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It was when they brought me to see Olwen at the
‘Home,’ ” the girl continued, “that I made Father have
her at our house, for Nanny .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. she was my nurse then
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and me to take care of! I knew she was at the
‘Home,’ .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. oh, Wolf, she was such a sweet little thing!
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. for I heard them talking about her. And I made
Father take me to see her, and we were friends in a second.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So it was you that persuaded Mr. Smith to take her
into his house?” said Wolf. “And you were only a child
yourself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie gave a quaint little chuckle. “I was a pretty obstinate
child, I’m afraid,” she said. “Besides, Olwen and
I both cried terribly and hugged each other. I was mad
about children,” she added gravely; “just mad about
them, when I was young.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Was your father hard to persuade?” enquired Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl gave him one of her lowering sulkily-humorous
glances.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I made a fuss, you see,” she said solemnly. “I cried
and cried, till he agreed. It was Miss Gault who opposed
it most. Oh, Wolf, it’s terrible how Miss Gault has made
the child hate Christie. Christie has seen her several
times. I managed <span class='it'>that</span> for her! But Miss Gault must have
said something. I don’t know what. But the last time
Olwen would hardly speak to her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf frowned. “Of course, it’s possible, I suppose,
that it’s some kind of instinct in the little girl——” he
began ponderingly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No! No!” cried Mattie. “It’s Miss Gault. I know it’s
Miss Gault!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Christie told me she might be here this afternoon,”
said Wolf, looking about him from group to group of the
noisy young people around them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did she?” said Mattie, with a nervous start. “Did
she really, Wolf?” And she, too, threw an anxious glance
round the field. “I wouldn’t like her feelings to be hurt,”
she added. “They <span class='it'>would</span> be, I know, if she tried to speak
to Olwen.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s mind reverted violently to the solitary grey
feather in the “Urn Burial.” At that moment he felt as
though not anyone .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. not Gerda herself .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. could
stop him from following that fragile figure if he caught
sight of it in this crowd!</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mattie was now waving her hand to Olwen, whose
airy boat had begun to slacken its speed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They moved together towards the swing; and Wolf
rushed forward to help the child to the ground. As he
lifted her out, he felt his forehead brushed by the floating
ends of her loosened hair.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She put her thin arms round him and hugged him tight
as soon as he set her down.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I love swinging so! I love swinging so!” she
gasped.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Would you like to have another one?” he said
gravely, looking down at that glowing little face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her eyes shone with infinite gratitude. “Aunt Mattie’s
spent every penny Grandfather gave her,” she whispered.
“Would you really give me one more? There! You pay
it to that man over there; the one with the funny eyes!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf handed over the coin and lifted the child back
into the painted boat. He waited at her side till the machinery
started again and then returned to Mattie.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Didn’t you have the least guess about you and me?”
the girl said; and it gave him a thrill of pleasure to
see what animation had come into her stolid countenance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not exactly a guess,” he answered. “But I did have
some kind of an odd feeling; as though I understood you
and followed your thoughts, even when you were silent.
Heavens! Mattie, dear; and you were silent almost all
the time!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your mother wasn’t very nice to me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, one can hardly blame her for that, can one?
People do feel rather odd in these situations.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But I was nice to <span class='it'>you</span>, wasn’t I?” the girl went on.
“And yet I couldn’t bear to think that Father wasn’t
my real father,” she added faintly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie’s face had such a touching expression at that
moment—an expression at once so thrilled and so puzzled—that
with a quick and sudden movement he flung
his arm round her neck and gave her a brusque kiss,
full on the mouth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Solent! Wolf!” she protested feebly. “You
mustn’t! What will <span class='it'>she</span> think?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, <span class='it'>she’ll</span> think you’ve found a young man,” he replied,
laughing; “and so you <span class='it'>have</span>, my dear,” he added
affectionately.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But though he laughed at her embarrassment, and
though she laughed faintly with him, it was clear enough
to his mind, as he glanced at the face of the child in
the swing, that their kiss had not been received very happily
up there.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Two burning eyes flashed down at him like two quivering
poniards, and two fierce little hands clutched the
sides of the olive-green boat as if they had been the
sides of a war-chariot.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That child of yours is jealous,” he whispered hurriedly
in his companion’s ear. “But don’t you worry,”
he added. “It won’t last, when she knows me better.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved up to the swing and remained watching the
little girl as she whirled past him like a small angry-eyed
comet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>By degrees his steady matter-of-fact attention disarmed
that jealous heart; and when the swing stopped, and he
had gravely kissed her and handed her back to Mattie,
all was once more well.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We must go now and find your grandfather,” said
Mattie to Olwen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll come with you,” said Wolf. “I left my mother
with Mr. Smith; so we’ll kill two birds with one
stone!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They moved off together; but suddenly, crossing a gap
among the people, Wolf caught sight of Bob Weevil
and Lobbie Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You go on, you two—do you mind? We’ll meet later.
There’s someone I <span class='it'>must</span> run after.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Both of his companions looked a little hurt at this
brusque departure; but with a repeated “We’ll meet
later! Good-bye!” he swung off in clumsy haste, pushing
his way so impetuously through the crowd, that he
aroused both anger and derision.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For a time he was afraid that he had lost his quarry
completely, so dense had the medley become around the
booths; but at last, with a sigh of relief, he came upon
them. They were both watching with unashamed delight a
young short-skirted gipsy who was dancing wildly to a
tambourine. As she danced, she beat her knees and threw
bold, provocative glances at her audience.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf approached the two boys unobserved and was
conscious of a passing spasm of shameless sympathy
when he caught the expression of entranced lechery in
the concentrated eyes of the young grocer. Lobbie Torp’s
interest was evidently distracted by the audacious leaps
and bounds of the gipsy-wench and by her jangling music;
but Mr. Weevil could contemplate nothing but her
legs. These moving objects seemed to be on the point of
causing him to howl aloud some obscene “Evoe!” For
his mouth was wide open and great beads of perspiration
stood out upon his forehead.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl stopped breathless at last, but without a moment’s
delay began to collect money, holding out her
musical instrument with long, bare arms, and indulging
in liberal and challenging smiles.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It tickled Wolf’s fancy at this juncture to note the
beaten-dog expression in Mr. Weevil’s countenance as
he pulled Lobbie away with him and tried to shuffle off
unobserved. In their hurried and rather ignominious retreat
they ran straight into Wolf’s arms.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lordie! Hullo!” stammered Lob. “It’s Mr. Redfern—I
mean, Mr. Solent, ain’t it?” said Bob Weevil.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf gravely shook hands with them both.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s not easy to keep one’s money in one’s pocket on a
day like this,” he remarked casually.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Weevil gave him a furtive water-rat glance; and
Wolf would not have been surprised had the young man
taken incontinently to his heels.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Bob knows all about they gipoos when they do zither
like moskitties,” observed Lob slyly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shut up, you kid!” retorted the other, “or I’ll tell
Mr. Solent how I caught you kissing a tree.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I never kissed no tree,” muttered Lob sulkily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>What?</span>” cried his friend indignantly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I did, ’twere along o’ they loveyers us seed in Willum’s
Lane ditch. ’Twere enough to make a person kiss
his wone self, what us did see; and ’twere ye what showed
’em to I.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope you have both enjoyed yourselves this afternoon,”
began Wolf again. “Christie can’t have come,”
he thought to himself; and he wondered if he should
ask Mr. Weevil point-blank about her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mr. Weevil was bent upon his silly, obstinate
bullying of Lobbie. He kept trying to inveigle Wolf in
this unamiable game.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lob thinks we’re all as simple as his Mummy in
Chequers Street!” continued the youth, with an unpleasant
leer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t ’ee listen to him!” cried Lob. “Everyone knows
what <span class='it'>his</span> Mummy were, afore old man Weevil paid Lawyer
Pipe to write ‘Whereas’ in his girt book!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Listen, you two——” expostulated Wolf. “I want to
ask you both a question.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’ll answer ’ee, same as my dad answered Mr. Manley
when ’a cussed about his mother’s gravestone. ‘Bless
us!’ said my dad, ‘and do ’ee take I for King Pharaoh?’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What was it you wanted to ask us, Sir?” enquired the
elder youth, pompously interrupting Lobbie.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, quite a simple thing, Mr. Weevil. I was only
wondering if Miss Malakite was out here today.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Certainly she’s here, Sir. Certainly she is.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Us came along o’ she, on our bicycles,” threw in
Lobbie.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where is she now, then?” Wolf insisted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She went castle-way, I think, Mr. Solent,” said Bob
Weevil.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She said to we,” interjected Lobbie, “that her reckoned
she’d have a quiet stroll-like, long o’ they ruings.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf looked from one to the other. “So, in plain
words, you deserted Miss Malakite?” he said sternly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lob knows what I said when she was gone,” mumbled
Mr. Weevil.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“When she were gone,” echoed the boy. “I should say
so!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What <span class='it'>did</span> you say?” asked Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He said her walked like a lame hare,” threw in
Lobbie.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I didn’t, you little liar! Don’t believe him, Mr. Solent!
I said she walked lonesome-like with her head hanging
down.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That weren’t <span class='it'>all</span> you said, Bob Weevil! Don’t you
remember what you said when us were looking at thik
man-monkey? No! ’twere when us seed they girt cannibals
all covered with blue stripes. That’s when ’twere!
Dursn’t thee mind how thee said ’twas because Miss
Malakite hadn’t got no young man that she went loppiting
off to they ruings ’stead of buying fairings like
the rest of they?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf suddenly found himself losing his temper. “I
think you both behaved abominably,” he cried, “leaving
a young lady, like that, to go off by herself! Well, I’m
going after her; and I’ll tell her what I think of you
two when I’ve found her!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He strode off in the direction indicated by the boys’
words. It was towards the southern extremity of the fair-field
that he now made his way, where a dilapidated
hedge and a forlorn little lane separated the castle-field
from the castle-ruins. He hadn’t gotten far, however,
when, glancing at a row of motionless human backs,
transfixed into attitudes of petrified wonder by the gesticulations
of a couple of clowns, he became aware that
two of those backs were obscurely familiar to him. He approached
them sideways, and his first glance at their concentrated
profiles revealed the fact that they were Mrs.
Torp and old Dimity Stone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It gave him a queer shock to think that this tatterdemalion
shrew in rusty black was actually Gerda’s mother.
For the least fragment of a second he was aware of a
shiver of animal panic, like a man who hears the ice
he is crossing bend and groan under him; but he forced
himself to walk straight up to them and salute them by
name.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m glad to see you, Mrs. Torp,” he said cheerfully.
“How do you do, Dimity? You and I haven’t met for
several long days.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hark at him, Mrs. Stone,” gasped Gerda’s mother.
“Hark at him, how ’ee do coax a body! He do look and
speak just as I was telling ’ee, don’t ’ee, now? If I hadn’t
told ’ee, honest to God, how the gentleman spoke, ye’d
have never known it, would ’ee, Mrs. Stone?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The withered face of Mrs. Torp remained turned toward
her companion as she uttered this ambiguous welcome.
She seemed unable to give Wolf so much as one
single glance from her little vixen eyes, over which two
artificial pansies, hanging from the battered bonnet on
her head, jiggled disconcertingly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But old Dimity retained Wolf’s fingers quite a long
while in her bony hand; and with absorbed and searching
interest, as if she had been a fortune-teller, she peered
into his countenance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The gentleman be far from what thee or any others
have reckoned,” repeated the crone slowly. “I’ve always
known you were a deep one, Mr. Solent,” she added.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m glad you think better of me than Mrs. Torp does,
Dimity,” threw in Wolf, and he glanced anxiously over
their heads toward the boundary of the field, his mind
full of the deserted Christie.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think of ’ee as one what <span class='it'>speaks</span> fair enough,” grumbled
Gerda’s mother, “but ’tis deeds <span class='it'>I</span> waits for. As I
said to Torp this very mornin’ .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ‘Thy fair-spoken
young gent,’ I said, ‘be only another Redfern; and all
the country do know how daft <span class='it'>he</span> were!’ Squire Urquhart
must have ’em daft! Daft must they be for he, as I said
to Torp. And that’s because it’s only the daft ’uns what’ll
serve for his cantrips—the girt bog-wuzzel ’ee is!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf detected a very sagacious expression in old
Dimity’s eye as she dropped his fingers at this.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This gent bain’t no more a Redfern, Jane Torp, than
a pond-pike be a gudgeon. What I’ve a-said to ee in
neighbour-fashion I’d say now to ’ee on Bible-oath.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a dead silence for a moment between the
three of them, broken only by the gibberish of the two
clowns, which sounded like the chatter of a pair of impudent
parakeets amid the slow, rich Dorsetshire speech
about them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Without pausing to think of the effect of his words on
Gerda’s mother, Wolf could not restrain himself from
uttering at this juncture the question which so occupied
his mind. “By the way, Mrs. Torp, have you, by any
chance, seen Miss Malakite here this afternoon? I
wanted to find her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Torp nudged her companion with the handle of
her umbrella.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So ye’re after her, too, are ye, Mister? What do ’ee
make o’ that, Dimity Stone? Hee! Hee! Hee! The gentleman
from London must have a sweetheart for Wednesday
and a sweetheart for Thursday. But you have a care,
Mr. Solent! Our Gerda bain’t one for sharing her fairings;
and she’ll let ’ee know it! Won’t she, Dimity
Stone?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt unable to decide whether this outburst, under
the pressure of which the thin cheeks of Mrs. Torp tightened
over their bones till they were as white as the skin
of a toad-stool, was just ordinary Blacksod humour or
was malignity. He contented himself with taking off his
hat, wishing them a pleasant evening, and hurrying
away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he moved towards the southern boundary of the
field, he found his mind beset with a burden of tumultuous
misgiving. Mrs. Torp’s malicious “Hee! Hee! Hee!”
continued to croak like a devil’s frog in the pit of his
stomach; and he remembered with hardly less discomfort
the queer look that the old Dimity had given him.
He <span class='it'>must</span> find Christie! That was the one essential necessity.
Every step he took towards that ragged little hedge
increased his nervous agitation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why did chance throw them both in my way at this
same moment?” he thought, as he walked automatically
forward. And then a still more furtive and dangerous
whisper entered his mind. “<span class='it'>Why didn’t I meet Christie
first?</span>”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The ghastly treachery of this final speculation, coming
to him on the very morrow of the “yellow bracken,”
only made him shake his head, as if freeing himself from
a thicket of brambles, and stride forward with more
reckless resolution than ever.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Long afterwards he could recall every slightest sensation
that he had as he crossed that empty portion of the
fair-field. One of these sensations was a vivid awareness
of the sardonic grimacing of that man in the churchyard.
The perversity of his father seemed physically to
weigh upon him. He had the feeling that he was himself
reproducing some precise piece of paternal misdoing.
He felt shamelessly like him! He felt as though his arms
were swinging as <span class='it'>his</span> arms used to .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. his legs striding
the very stride of <span class='it'>his</span> legs!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had now left the last tent far behind, and was
approaching the low thickset hedge that separated the
castle-field from the castle-lane.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he came up to the hedge, he nearly stumbled over
a half-skinned, half-eaten rabbit, one of whose glazed
wide-open eyes fixed itself upon him from the ground
with a protesting appeal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mechanically he stooped down, and, lifting the thing
up by its ears, placed it among the young dock-leaves
and the new shoots of hedge-parsley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he leaned both his arms over the top of the
brambles, and, raising himself on tiptoe, peered into the
lane beyond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ah! He had not then come to no purpose!</p>

<p class='pindent'>A little way down the lane, under a closed and carefully
wired gate leading to the castle-ruins, crouched the
unmistakable figure of Christie Malakite.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl was on her knees, her legs crooked under
her and her hands clasped on her lap. By her side,
fallen to the ground, were her hat and some sort of paper
parcel. She lifted her head and saw him there; but
remained motionless, just staring at him without a sign.
Wolf tightened his long overcoat round his knees and
forced his way straight through the thick brambles. A
couple of minutes later he was kneeling by her side on
the grass, hugging her tear-stained face against his ribs
and stroking her hair with his hands. “I’ve had a hunt
for you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a hunt for you!” he panted. “What did
you come to this damned place for? Well! I’ve got you
now, anyway. I don’t know what I should have done if
I hadn’t found you. But I’ve hunted you down .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
like a hare, my dear .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just like a hare!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. little .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. fool!” she gasped faintly.
“I’ll be all right in a minute. I ought .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to have .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
known better than .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to have come here! The boys
were kind .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but, of course, they wanted .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to enjoy
themselves. I was a burden on them .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and then
I felt .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I felt I couldn’t .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. bear it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She pressed her face against his coat, struggling to
hold back her tears.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Moving his hands to her shoulders, and bending down,
he touched the top of her head with his lips. Her hair,
neatly divided by a carefully brushed parting, was so
silky and fine that he felt as if his kiss had penetrated
to the very centre of her skull. But she did not draw
away from him. She only buried her forehead deeper in
the folds of his heavy coat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a tuft of loosely-growing stitchwort in the
hedge by the gale-post; and this frail plant, as he surveyed
it across her crouching form, mingled with his
wild thoughts. Had anything like this ever happened to
a man before .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that on the day after such an ecstasy
he should feel as he felt now? “I must be a monster!”
he said to himself. “Am I going to begin snatching at
the soul and body of every girl I meet down here?”
With the cluster of stitchwort still illuminating his
thought, as a flower-scroll illuminates a monkish script,
he now struggled desperately to justify himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This feeling,” he protested, “is a different thing altogether.
It’s pity .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that’s what it is! And, of course,
Gerda being so beautiful, pity doesn’t .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie lifted up her head now, and sat back, hugging
her knees and staring at him. He, too, changed his
position, so that his shoulders leant against the lower
bars of the gate. “It’s queer how natural it seems to
be .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to be with you like this,” he said slowly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She gave a little nod. “I used to tell myself stories
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” she began, searching his face intently as if what
she wanted to say lay hidden in its lines. “I feel so different
now,” she went on, “that it would be easy to tell
you.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” Once more her voice sank into silence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s better to be alone,” he echoed, “unless you can
think aloud. I’ve been walking about this fair-field all
the afternoon and talking to everyone; but I couldn’t
think aloud until this moment.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were both silent, staring helplessly at each other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wish you were a boy, Christie!” he brought out
abruptly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Something in the peevish gravity of this must have
tickled her fancy, for she smiled at him with a free,
unrestrained, schoolgirlish smile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I used to wish that myself,” she murmured gently;
and then she sighed, her smile fading as quickly as it
had come.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He knitted his heavy eyebrows and scowled at her in
deep thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Two persistent sounds forced their identities into his
drugged consciousness. The first was the brazen clamour
of the whirligig engines. The second was the whistling
of a blackbird. This latter sound had already assumed
that peculiar mellowness which meant that the sunrays
were falling horizontally upon that spot, and that
the long March afternoon was drawing to its close.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was impossible that this bird’s voice could fail to
bring to his mind the events of yesterday’s twilight and
that up-turned face at which he had gazed so exultantly
in the gathering river-mists. To drown the blackbird’s
notes, he began hurriedly telling her one thing after
another of his afternoon’s adventures. When he came to
his conversation with Miss Gault, they both instinctively
shifted their position; and he found himself helping her
to adjust the loosened belt of her old-fashioned cloak
with a gesture that was almost paternal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“One thing I cannot understand,” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well?” she murmured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I cannot understand how Olwen should feel towards
you as they tell me she does.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl’s forehead wrinkled itself into a strained,
pinched intensity; but all she said was, “I could never
take care of any child as well as Mattie Smith.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t believe you,” he retorted bluntly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He avoided her eyes now; and, as he looked away into
the great elm-tree that grew near the gate, he caught
sight of a large nest up there.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is that a rook’s nest?” he asked, pointing it out to
her with upraised arm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie turned and peered upwards.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A missel-thrush’s, I think,” she said, after a second’s
hesitation. “Rooks’ nests are all sticks .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and they’re
higher up, too.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>With lifted heads they both stared into, the elm-tree,
and, beyond the tree, into the cold March sky.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why not take us as we are,” he said slowly, apparently
addressing the missel-thrush’s nest, “as two hunted,
harassed consciousnesses, meeting by pure chance in
endless blue space and finding out that they have the
same kind of mind?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Their heads sank down after this, and Wolf automatically
fumbled for his cigarettes and then consciously let
them go.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve never felt as much at ease with anyone as with
you, Christie .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. except perhaps my mother. No, not
even except her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think we <span class='it'>are</span> alike,” she said quietly. And then,
with the same schoolgirlish simple amusement that had
struck him before, “We’re too alike, I think, to do much
harm to anyone!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her face grew suddenly grave, and she stretched out
her thin arm and touched Wolf lightly on the knee. “You
must be prepared for one thing,” she said. “You must be
prepared to find that I haven’t a trace of what people
call the ‘moral sense.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll risk that danger!” he retorted lightly. “Besides,
if you’ve got <span class='it'>no</span> conscience, I’m worse off still. I’ve got
a diseased conscience!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She didn’t even smile at this sally. With a quick
wrinkling of her brow, as if under a twinge of physical
discomfort, she scrambled to her feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must get my bicycle,” she said, with a little shiver.
“Father will be waiting for his supper.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf rose too; and they stood rather awkwardly side
by side, while the blackbird flew off with an angry
scream.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where is your bicycle?” he asked lamely; and as
he saw her and felt her, standing there by his side, so
pitfully devoid of all physical magnetism, he could not
resist a chilly recognition that something of the mysterious
appeal that had drawn him to her had slipped away
and got lost.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt in that second that it had been a piece of pure
madness to have wished that all this had happened before
yesterday’s “yellow bracken.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She glanced up at him with a quick, searching look.
Then she tightened her cloak resolutely round her. “It’s
in the Lovelace stables,” she said. “I can easily find it.
You needn’t come.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Of course I’ll come! I’ll go with you and put you
on it; and then I’ll come back for my mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s pity I feel,” he said to himself. “I’ve got Gerda
for good and all. It’s just pity I feel.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They followed the lane westward, skirting the edge of
the fair-field. When they reached the foot of “The
Slopes,” they saw the whole of Ramsgard outspread before
them. The sunset-mist, rising up from the River
Lunt, threw over the little town the sort of glamour that
cities wear in old fantastic prints. Vaguely, under the
anæsthesia of this diffused glory in the chilly air, he
marvelled at the mad chance that had plunged him
into these two girls’ lives with this disturbing simultaneousness.
He began furtively trying to annihilate
with his imagination first one life and then the other
from his obstinate preoccupation. But the effort proved
hopelessly futile! To conceive of the future without
Gerda’s loveliness was impossible. But equally was it
impossible to cover up this strange new feeling. Only
“pity,” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but a pity that had a quivering sweetness
in it!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re all right now?” he enquired abruptly, as they
crossed the railway-track.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Absolutely,” she answered firmly, evidently recognizing
that this allusion to her original trouble was a sign
of a certain withdrawal in her companion. “And please,
please, believe me when I tell you that I hardly ever
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. no, practically never .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. give way like that.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do you think did it?” he blurted out clumsily.
“Those silly boys deserting you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She made no reply at all to this; and he experienced
a wave of embarrassment that brought a hot prickling
sensation into his cheeks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ve been very kind to me,” she said unexpectedly,
in a clear emphatic voice. And then she added very
slowly, pronouncing the words as if each of them were
a heavy bar of silver and she were an exhausted stevedore
emptying the hold of a ship, “Kinder .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to me
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. than anyone’s .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ever been .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in the whole
of my life.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>These words of hers, healing his momentary discomfort,
gave him such happiness, that, as they entered the
Lovelace stables and she moved in front of him across
the cobblestones, he furtively rubbed his hands together,
just as he would have done if he had been alone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What a good thing you came over here this afternoon,”
he said, as he wheeled her bicycle out of the
yard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t know about that!” she answered promptly,
with a flicker of her peculiar elfish humour; and it
turned out to be the tone of these words beyond all others,
that remained with him when she was gone. They
had the tone of some sort of half-human personality
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. some changeling out of the purer elements .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
upon whose nature whatever impressions fell would always
fall with a certain mitigation, with a certain lenient
tenuity, like the fall of water upon water, or of air upon
air!</p>

<div><h1 id='chap10'>CHRISTIE</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>The cheap wooden clock on the mantelpiece of his
small parlour made itself audible to the ears of Wolf
across the little passageway as he stood above his kitchen-stove.
Eight times the clock struck; and the old vivid
consciousness of what time was and was not caught his
mind and held it. It was not a consciousness of the passing
of time as it affected his own life that arrested him.
Of that kind of individual awareness he had scarcely
any trace. To himself he always seemed neither young
nor old. Indeed, of bodily self-consciousness—that
weather-eye, kept open to the addition of years and
months upon his personal head—he had nothing at all.
What he lived in was not any compact, continuous sense
of personal identity, but rather <span class='it'>a series of disembodied
sensations</span>, some physical, some mental, in which his
identity was absolutely merged and lost. He was vividly
aware of these momentary sensations in relation to other
feelings of the same kind, some long past and some anticipated
in his imagination; but he was accustomed to
regard all these not from out of the skin, so to speak, of
a living organism, but from a detachment so remote and
far away as to seem almost outside both the flowing of
time and the compactness of personality.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Eight o’clock in the morning of the first day of June
was what that timepiece said to him now; and his mind
paused upon the recognition of the vast company of
clocks and watches all the world over, ticking, ticking,
ticking—sending up, in tiny metallic beats, vibrations
of human computation into the depths of unthinkable
space.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He pushed open the iron cover of the stove and jabbed
with his poker at the fire inside. Then he took up a
wooden spoon and stirred the contents of an enamelled
pot of porridge that stood there, moving it aside from
the heat. A thrill of satisfaction ran through him when
he had done this, and he rubbed his hands together and
made a “face,” drawing back his under-lip in the manner
of a gargoyle, and constricting the muscles of his
chin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In less than half-an-hour, he thought, he would be
enjoying his breakfast at that kitchen-table with Gerda,
lovely and sulky as a young animal after her abrupt
awakening.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He ran up the short flight of creaking stairs, carpeted
with new linoleum; and with the merest pretence
of a tap at the door entered their bedroom. The
girl was lying on her back fast asleep, her fair hair
spread out, loose and bright in the sunshine, across the
indented pillow of her recent bedfellow. Her arms were
outstretched above the coverlet, and one of her hands
was hanging down over the side of the bed. His entrance
did not arouse her, and he stood for a while at
her side, meditating on the mysterious simplicity of her
especial kind of loveliness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he bent down, kissed her into consciousness,
laughed at her scolding, and with one resolute swing of
his arms lifted her bodily from the bed, set her on her
feet on the floor, and hugged her to his heart, struggling
and indignant. The warmth of her body under the childish
white night-gown she wore, buttoned close up to her
chin, gave him a rough, earthy, animal ecstasy. He had
already discovered that it was more delicious to hold
her like this, he himself fully awake and dressed, and
she as she was, than under any other circumstances. A
pleasant element of the unhabitual and the predatory
sweetened for him that particular embrace. “Don’t!” she
cried, struggling to push him away. “Don’t, Wolf! Let
me go, I tell you!” But he went on kissing her and
caressing her as if it had been the first time he had ever
taken her in his arms.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At last, lifting her clean off her feet, with both arms
under her body, he put her back upon the bed and drew
the bedclothes over her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There!” he cried. “How does <span class='it'>that</span> feel?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the girl turned round with her face to the wall
and refused to speak.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Eight o’clock, young lady,” he cried brusquely.
“Breakfast will be ready in a quarter of an hour.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>For answer she only pulled the bedclothes more tightly
round her neck.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If you haven’t time to wash or do your hair, you must
come down as you are. Where’s your dressing-gown?”
And he looked vaguely round the room. “Hurry up,
now!” he added. “Remember all that’s going to happen
today.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a movement under the twisted sheet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re a wretch!” she gasped, in a muffled voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Never mind what I am. Keep your scoldings till you
get downstairs. I’ve got an exciting piece of news for
you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This brought her round with a jerk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What are you hiding up in your mind now? Tell
me quick! Tell me, Wolf!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But he only laughed at her, waved his hand, and
went out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Running downstairs again, he returned to the kitchen,
moved the steaming kettle to the side of the stove, turned
the spoon in the oatmeal, and then, crossing the little
passage where his own grey overcoat and Gerda’s cream-coloured
cloak, hanging side by side on their adjoining
pegs, regarded him with equivocal intentness, he opened
the front-door and went out into the road.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In one warm inrushing wave the fragrance of the
whole West Country seemed to flow through him as he
came forth. Sap-sweet emanations from the leafy recesses
of all the Dorset woods on that side of High Stoy seemed
to mingle at that moment with the rank, grassy breath
of all the meadow-lands of Somerset.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The iron railings in front of that row of meagre, nondescript
houses opened upon the airy confluence of two
vast provinces of leafiness and sunshine—to the right
Melbury Bub, with its orchards and dairies; to the left
Glastonbury, with its pastures and fens—while the umbrageous
“auras” of these two regions, blending together
in the air above the roofs of Blacksod, merged into yet
a third essence, an essence sweeter than either—the very
soul of the whole wide land lying between the English
Channel and the Bristol Channel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Number Thirty-Seven Preston Lane was the last house
in a row of small workmen’s cottages at the extreme
western limit of the town of Blacksod. What met Wolf’s
actual eyes as he clicked the little gate in the iron railings
and emerged upon the road, was only a small
portion of the secret causes of his happiness that June
morning. He had long craved to establish himself in
just such a nondescript row of unpretentious dwellings
on the outskirts of a town. He had always had a
feeling that the magic of simple delights came with
purer impact upon the mind when unalloyed by the
“artistic” or the “picturesque.” Large houses and large
gardens, pretty houses and pretty gardens, seemed to
intrude themselves, with all their responsibilities of
possession, between his senses and the free, clear flow of
unconfined, unpersonalized beauty. His feeling about
the matter had something in common with the instinct
that has created the monk’s cell—only the cell that Wolf
preferred was a lath-and-plaster workman’s villa, a
place possessed of no single æsthetic quality, except perhaps
that of being easily kept very neat and clean.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The fact of living here with Gerda under conditions
identical with those of the Blacksod carpenters, bricklayers,
and shop-assistants, threw into beautiful relief
every incident of his life’s routine. Preparing food, preparing
fires, the very floor-scrubbing wherein he shared,
took on for him, just because of this absence of the deliberately
“artistic,” a rarefied poetical glamour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved out now into the middle of the road and
surveyed the landscape. As he did so, two very distinct
and contradictory odours assailed his nostrils. There
were no houses across the way, nothing but a foul-smelling
ditch, the recipient of sewage from an adjoining
pig-yard; and beyond that, an enormously high
hedge, on the top of which, where no child could
reach, grew clumps of honeysuckle and sprays of wild
roses. The smell of these flowers contended oddly
enough with the smell of pigs’ dung; and the two odours,
thus subtly mingled, had become for him a constant accompaniment
to the thoughts that passed through his
mind as he went in and out of his tiny front-garden.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The pigsty was on his right as he stood facing the
ditch; but on his left there grew in the meadow just
beyond the hedge a large ash-tree—a tree from among
whose grey upcurving branches a thrush was wont to
sing, always increasing the vehemence of its ecstasy till
the moment when the road grew quite dark. The bird
began singing now, and its thrush-notes made Wolf
think of those wild blackbird-notes of Gerda, as they
flooded the meadows on the day when she lost her virginity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Thinking of Gerda as he stared up into the ash-tree,
he began to meditate on the extraordinary good luck
he had had ever since he had come to the West Country.
“I must be born under a lucky star,” he thought;
and his mind set itself to review the most recent examples
of this good fortune.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He recalled the satisfactory manner in which his iron-willed
mother had suddenly receded from all her opposition
to his union with Gerda. He recalled the equally
satisfactory generosity of Mr. Urquhart, who had come
forward with an offer to let her go on living at Lenty
Cottage free of rent as long as Wolf himself remained his
secretary.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He recalled the extraordinary kindness displayed
toward him by Darnley Otter, who had not only lent him
the fifty pounds necessary to buy furniture, but had also
introduced him to the authorities of the Blacksod Grammar
School, where he was now earning a pound a week
by giving lessons every morning in English and History.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Luck! luck! luck!” he said in his heart, rubbing his
hands together. Through his thin indoor shoes the magnetism
of the earth seemed at that moment pouring into
every nerve of his body. Happiness, such as he had
rarely experienced, flooded his being; and the fantastic
idea came into his head that if he were to die now he
would in some subtle way cheat death.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must remember this moment,” he said to himself.
“Whatever happens to me henceforth, I must remember
this moment, and be grateful to the gods!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Just as he opened the iron gate and glanced at the
two or three newly-budded plants that were coming out
in his little patch of garden, the owner of the pigsty,
a ruffianly curmudgeon who earned his living in more
than one disreputable way, took it into his head to pour
out a great bucket of swill into the pig-trough, an action
that caused so ear-piercing a volley of bestial shrieks,
that Wolf stopped aghast, his heart almost ceasing to
beat, and, turning his head, threw an agitated glance
toward that sinister little erection of tarred boardings.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His first idea was that one of the animals was being
slaughtered; but the sound of voracious gobbling which
now reached his ears reassured him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s only feeding them,” he said to himself, and entered
the house. In the kitchen he found Gerda already
beginning her bowl of porridge.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s the news, Wolf?” she enquired, with the
indistinct voice of a greedy child, turning, as she did
so, her cream-clogged spoon upside-down in her mouth,
so as to lick it clean. “What’s this you were going to
tell me?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Guess, sweetheart!” he said contentedly, emptying
what was left of the cream-jug over his own oatmeal.
“Nothing, in fact, could be better. Urquhart announced
last night that he has decided to go slow with our History.
You know what a hurry he’s been in? But he now
says he’s decided to make a complete job of it, even if
it takes five years to finish.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The infantile sulkiness in Gerda’s face only deepened
at his words, and with an impatient gesture she stretched
out her arms and tossed back her head. Then she tightened
the green ribbon with which she had fastened her
locks, and fixed upon him a cloudy, satiric frown. She
appeared so enchanting in her crossness, that Wolf forgot
everything as he watched these movements, and for a
moment he just looked at her in silence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You don’t think much of my news, then?” he said
presently. “But you don’t realize how awkward it would
have been if this confounded book had come to an end
this Autumn. Where would we have got another hundred
pounds from, eh, sweetheart? Tell me that!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A hundred pounds!” the girl muttered sarcastically.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, a hundred pounds,” he retorted. “Two-thirds
of our income.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rose and moved to the stove, to get the kettle to
refill their teapot.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But that’s not all; so you needn’t look sour. There’s
something much more amusing than that.” She waited
impatiently now, and he went on. “Urquhart doesn’t
want me over there this afternoon and Mother’s coming
to tea.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl’s sulkiness changed in a moment to something
like pitiful dismay.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, Wolf!” she exclaimed. “This is the first time.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s been twice to lunch,” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Gerda’s eyes remained troubled and very wide
open, and the corners of her under-lip drooped.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Darnley was here, too—both times!” she gasped.
“We’ve never had her alone, and I’ve got no clothes
for an afternoon.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No clothes?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You know what I mean, perfectly well,” she went
on peevishly. “People like your mother don’t have the
same things on in the morning as they do in the afternoon.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf watched her with narrowing eyelids. He recalled
that first walk with her up the slope of Babylon Hill,
and his pursuit of her among the earthworks of Poll’s
Camp. Why did all girls introduce into life an element
of the conventional—into that life of which they themselves
were the most mysterious expression? He became
suddenly aware of the existence, in the beautiful head
opposite him, of a whole region of interests and values
that had nothing to do with love-making and nothing to
do with romance. Was love itself, then, and all its
mysteries, only a kind of magic gate leading into a land
full of alien growths and unfamiliar soils?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gerda, my sweet Gerda!” he cried reproachfully.
“How absurd! What does it matter? It’s only my mother.
She must take us as she finds us.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl pouted and smiled scornfully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s all you know!” she retorted. “Your mother’s
a woman, isn’t she?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf stared at her. Was there then some queer inner
world, parallel to the one that was important to him,
wherein women encountered one another, and without
whose ritual life was completely unreal to them? “God!”
he thought to himself. “If this <span class='it'>is</span> so, the sooner I get the
secret of this ‘other reality,’ the better for both Gerda
and me!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I only beg one thing of you, sweetheart,” he
went on aloud, “and that is that you don’t try and make
those funny scones again that you made for Christie.
I’ll get some halfpenny buns or tea-cakes at Pimpernel’s.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Halfpenny buns!” she repeated contemptuously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He began to raise his voice. “They’re the very nicest
things! How silly you are! But I don’t care what you
get, as long as there’s plenty of thin bread-and-butter.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t cut it! I never could cut it!” she cried helplessly,
her enormous grey eyes beginning to fill with
tears.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was then that Wolf began to realize that it was
necessary to be as indulgent to the “realities” of this
alien array of feelings as if they had been those of a
being of a different planet. He got up from his seat
and walked round their square kitchen-table, a table
that according to his own caprice had been left bare of
any covering. Standing over the girl, he bent her head
back with both his hands and kissed her many times.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It seemed to him, as he did this, that he had done this
very same thing in another room, and even in another
country. He remained motionless behind her for a moment
when he had released her, and lifted his head.
Where had all this occurred before? A queer feeling
came over him as if she and he were acting a part in
some fantastic dream-world, and that he had only to
make one enormous effort, to find he had destroyed for
both of them the whole shadow-scenery of their life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Gerda, knowing nothing of what was passing in his
mind, turned round in her chair and pushed him away
with all the strength of her young arm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t be so annoying, Wolf!” she cried. “There! I’m
hungry, I tell you. Haven’t you got any eggs for us?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved away obediently to the stove, made his
arrangements for boiling three eggs—two for himself
and one for her—and remained there on guard, his
watch in his hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The audible ticking of his watch, as he concentrated
his mind upon it, answered the louder ticking of the
clock in the parlour across the passage. “Time again!”
he sighed. And then he thought, “But I’ve got the power
to deal with far more serious jolts to my happiness than
this finding out that a girl’s ‘reality’ is not my ‘reality’!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In a minute or two, when he had set a china egg-cup
in front of each of them and had placed a brown egg
within hers and a white one in his own, and had resumed
his seat, he found that his quick adjustment of the wheels
and cogs of his mind had proved successful. “It doesn’t
matter in the least,” he thought, “whether we understand
each other or not. My existence is necessary to her, just
as hers is to me. Neither of us can really spoil anything
as long as that’s the case.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Whatever secret ways Gerda had of adjusting the
machinery of <span class='it'>her</span> mind, seemed to have been as successful
as his own; for when she had satisfied her hunger
and filled her teacup with strong, sweet tea, she lifted
her head quite cheerfully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll go to Pimpernel’s myself,” she said. “I saw something
there yesterday that I’m sure your mother would
like. And I’ll make toast. That’ll be just as nice as
bread-and-butter.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf declared himself completely satisfied at this prospect.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You go up now, sweetheart,” he said, “and finish
dressing, and make the bed. I’ll wash up. I’ll just have
time for that. There, do go quick! I don’t want anyone
to knock at the door and find you like that. We’ve got
to keep up the prestige of Preston Lane!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He spoke jestingly, but there was an element of concern
at the back of his mind. He had had some uncomfortable
moments now and again, when tradesmen’s boys
had come to the door at an early hour. He hated to think
of their ménage being a laughing-stock to all the Lob
Torps and Bob Weevils of the town.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a complete puzzle to him the way in which
Gerda made such a fuss about the conventions where his
mother was concerned, while to the Bob Weevils of the
place she let down every barrier as completely as if
she’d drifted into Blacksod from the primeval woods of
Arcady.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he watched her now, rushing upstairs like a young
Mænad, he remembered how the fancy had come into
his mind, that afternoon at Poll’s Camp, that the West-Saxon
Torp blood in her had been crossed at some very
early stage with an altogether different strain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hurriedly gathering the dishes together on the edge
of the sink, he proceeded to do what would certainly
not have passed unobserved by a more practical mistress
of the house. He proceeded to hold cups, saucers,
plates, bowls, knives, forks, and pots and pans under a
tap of perfectly cold water, rubbing them and scraping
them with his bare fingers, and then drying them violently—greasy
as most of them were—with the kitchen-towel.
As he did this, he caught a glimpse out of the
window of a stunted little laburnum-tree, which grew
in their back-yard; and he noticed, as he had often
noticed before, how one of its boughs was leafless
and seemed to be stretching out, in a sorrowful, fumbling
sort of way, towards their neighbour’s fence, above which
grew a sturdy lilac-bush, covered now with glossy heart-shaped
leaves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>On this occasion, however, for some unaccountable
reason, the sight of this forlorn branch brought vividly to
his mind the figure of Christie Malakite, as he had seen
her that day, crouched in the castle-lane. And with that
image there came to him—as if a door had unexpectedly
opened in the remotest wall of his mind’s fortress—a
deep, sickening craving, it was hard to tell for what—a
craving that pierced him like the actual thrust of a
spear. The bareness and tension of that extended branch
had won his sympathy before; but today, as he rubbed
the porridge-pot furiously with the greasy towel and
emptied the hot kettle-water into it, the sight of the
thing seemed to disturb the complacency of his whole
being.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A minute or two later, when he saw it again from the
window of their small privy, which abutted upon the
same back-yard, he got a sense of being hemmed in,
burdened, besieged, while some vague, indistinct appeal,
hard to define, was calling upon him for aid.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved out to the foot of the staircase, and, with
his hand upon the bannister, stood motionless, lost in
strange thoughts. These glimpses of certain fixed objects,
seen daily, yet always differently, through bedroom-windows,
scullery-windows, privy-windows, had, from
his childhood, possessed a curious interest for him. It
was as if he got from them a sort of runic handwriting,
the “little language” of Chance itself, commenting upon
what was, and is, and was to come. As he stood there,
he could hear Gerda moving about upstairs, and he hesitated
as to whether to run up and speak to her, or to go
out, as he generally did, without further farewell.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He decided finally upon the latter course; something
at the bottom of his mind, just then, making anything
else seem strained and unnatural. Snatching up his oak-stick,
therefore, he let himself out of the house with
deliberate quietness, and walked with rapid steps down
the road.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His way to the Grammar School led him past the
confectioner’s shop; and at the sight of the name “Pimpernel”
over the door, he decided to run in for a moment
and see for himself if the particular tea-cakes that
he had in mind were available that day.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not finding what he wanted, he was on the point of
going out again, when he heard a familiar voice proceeding
from the interior part of the shop. It was too late to
retreat. He was already recognized; and in another
second he found himself face to face with Mrs. Torp.
Gerda’s mother had been engaged in persuading old
Ruth Pimpernel to sell her a loaf of yesterday’s bread
at half-price.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Shaking hands vigorously with this uncongenial apparition,
whose shrewish aspect was not modified by the
dirty black bonnet she wore balanced on the top of her
head, Wolf found himself propitiating the woman to
the extreme limit of a somewhat unctuous geniality.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had often noticed that when his blood had been
quickened by rapid walking, he had a tendency to exaggerate
his natural <span class='it'>bonhomie</span> to a degree that was almost
fatuous.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You haven’t come to see us for such a long while, Mrs.
Torp,” he cried. “Gerda and I can’t get on without seeing
something of you. It’s too ridiculous”—so he blundered
on, in complete disregard of the sly expression in
Mrs. Torp’s eyes, like the expression of a tethered dog
leering at a hutch of tame hares—“it’s too ridiculous to
have you in the same place and to see so little of you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was impossible even for the perspicacity of Joan
Torp to put down this blustering friendliness to its true
account—to the pleasant glow, namely, diffused through
Wolf’s veins by his rapid walk; and so, with a nearer approach
to a benevolent grimace than he had ever seen
on her grim features, she assured him with unhesitating
emphasis that she would, “as sure as us be standing here,
Mr. Solent,” drop in for tea that very afternoon at Preston
Lane.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The appearance of the shop-girl with the stale loaf
destined for the monument-maker’s table—Mr. Torp
abominated stale bread—prevented the woman from detecting
the cloud that descended on Wolf’s brow on
receipt of this prompt acceptance of his hospitality.
It was, indeed, only when he was hurrying out of the
confectioner’s shop that he had the wit to turn round and
fling back a suggestion that if Mrs. Torp went over
there, now at once, her daughter would be very pleased
to see her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll leave it to Gerda,” he thought to himself. “She’ll
manage it somehow.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind, however, remained all that morning, as
he sat at his desk in the Grammar School fourth-form
room, asking questions about Edward Longshanks, teasingly
preoccupied with this encounter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She may not go there at all,” he thought. “It isn’t
her way to go there in the morning. They’re so funny,
those two, about their houses. Well, we must chance it
and hope for the best!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then, as he enlarged to his class upon that formidable
black sarcophagus in Westminster Abbey, with
its grim inscription, the under-flow of his mind kept
fretting against all the little incidents that had led to
this annoying issue.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I hadn’t stayed so long at that confounded privy-window,
I should have got out of Pimpernel’s before
she came in. And if I’d stopped to say good-bye to
Gerda, she’d have gone before I got there at all. Damn!
It’s like the rope, the water, the fire, the dog, and the
old woman getting home from market.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When his class was let out and he himself escaped into
the street at half-past twelve, it occurred to him that
it was curious how faint an impact upon his consciousness
this business of teaching history made. He was clever
enough to do the whole job with the surface of his mind.
“What the devil do those boys think of me?” he wondered
grimly. “I forget their existence as soon as I’m out
of sight of them.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He met Darnley Otter, at that moment, issuing forth
from his Latin lesson with a pile of papers in his hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley greeted him with more than his usual cordiality;
and as Wolf looked into his friend’s strangely-coloured
eyes, he felt that peculiar sensation of relief
which men are wont to feel when they encounter each
other after the confusion of sex-conflicts.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley laid his free hand on his friend’s arm, and
they moved down the street together; but for a while
Wolf heard nothing of what he was saying, so occupied
was he with a sudden question, gaping like a crack in a
hot stubble-field in the very floor of his mind, that had
just then obtruded itself. Was he really “in love,” in
the proper sense of that word, with his sweet bedfellow?
“But very likely I could never be ‘in love’ in <span class='it'>that</span> sense
with anyone,” he said to himself as they walked along.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then he became aware that Darnley had been
speaking to him for some while.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t see why I shouldn’t take you,” he was saying
now. “I <span class='it'>would</span>, like a shot, if she hadn’t been so funny
the other day when I talked about you. But I expect
there’s nothing in that! Perhaps you hurt her feelings in
some way. She’s a queer little oddity. I found that out
long ago. One has to be awfully careful.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>These words, and other words before them, now began
to penetrate Wolf’s consciousness, as they might
have done with a person recovering from an anæsthetic.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sorry,” he muttered apologetically, standing stock-still
on the pavement. “I wasn’t listening.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley stroked his pointed beard and looked him up
and down.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re boy-drunk, poor devil,” he murmured sympathetically.
“It does take time to wear off. You’re repeating
to yourself what you’d like to have retorted to
Rintoul Minor when he made you feel a fool. I’m often
like that myself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, I’m not,” protested the other. “But what <span class='it'>were</span>
you saying?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Nothing very startling,” said Darnley quietly, pulling
him forward by the arm. “It’s only I thought I’d take
you with me to Christie’s to lunch. Gerda won’t mind,
once in a way, will she?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf drew his heavy eyebrows down so low that his
startled gaze gleamed out at his companion like lantern-light
from a thatched shed. “I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. don’t .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. suppose
so,” he muttered hesitatingly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The truth was that Darnley’s suggestion had set something
vibrating violently deep down within him, like the
thuds of a buried drum played by an earth-gnome. So
this was what things had been tending to since he had
caught sight of that laburnum-branch?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley smiled and shrugged his shoulders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t say any more,” he cried. “I see you don’t want
to come. Well! Off with you, then .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. back to your
Saxon beauty. Christie’s expecting me, anyway.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf held him with an appeal in his eye.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s only that Gerda and I have got special things
to do today,” he said. “Under ordinary conditions I’d
have loved to come.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley looked at him gravely. “No bad news, I
hope?” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was silent. All manner of queer fancies passed,
like the shadows of rooks over a pond, across the surface
of his brain. One thing particularly he found himself
dwelling upon. “Didn’t seem friendly to me, eh?” And
he recalled the only two occasions on which he had seen
Christie alone since his marriage.</p>

<p class='pindent'>On both those occasions she had avoided all allusion
to the day of the horse-show. But she had been self-possessed
and natural, had laughed at his jests, had
talked freely with him about Mattie, had not even drawn
back from a passing reference to Olwen. And though her
allusions to Gerda were faint and slight, they were
friendly and sympathetic. But Wolf remembered well
how he had experienced a profound astonishment at
the abysses of pride and reserve into which this frail
being had the power of retreating.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gerda has been a bit surprised,” he said at last,
observing that Darnley was growing impatient to be off,
“that a friend like Christie hasn’t been in to see us more
often.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His companion freed his sleeve from the nervous
clutch with which Wolf quite unconsciously had seized
it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s silly of Gerda,” he said curtly. “She ought to
understand Christie better than that. Christie never goes
out to see people. People have to come and see <span class='it'>her</span>. Look
here, Solent”—and as he spoke, a gleam of boyish eagerness
came into his face—“why don’t you run back home
now, have a bit of lunch, and then both you and Gerda
come round to Christie’s? I’ll tell her you’re coming.
She’ll keep some hot chocolate for you. She makes splendid
hot chocolate.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf hesitated. “We’ve got my mother coming to
tea,” he said. “And perhaps someone else too,” he added,
thinking of Mrs. Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s all right. There’ll be plenty of time for that.
It’s not half-past two, anyway. Do go off now, there’s a
good chap; and be sure you bring Gerda.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf remained silent, uncertain, ill at ease, tapping
the ground with his stick.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right,” he said at last. “I’ll do as you say. We
shan’t be long over our lunch, that’s certain. But make it
plain to Christie that we’re only coming for a very
short time. Tell her we’ve got to get back to tea. That’ll
reassure her,” he added sardonically, “if we get on
her nerves.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t be an ass, Solent,” was his friend’s farewell-remark
as they turned to go their different ways.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It took Wolf as a rule exactly twenty minutes to walk
from the Grammar School gate to his own door; but this
time he lengthened the way by debouching into Monmouth
Street, where there were no shops and scarcely
any traffic.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The hot June sun was shining down almost perpendicularly
on the warm, uneven cobblestones of this quiet
alley, stones that left room for the occasional out-cropping
of thin moss-soft blades of grass. Wolf walked
along slowly, under the high brick wall which enclosed
the pleasant garden of a certain Lawyer Gault, a remote
relative of Selena’s. He came to a spot where the
branches of a tall lime-tree just inside the lawyer’s garden
threw a dreamy pattern of motionless shadows upon
the stones at his feet. There he stood still, while those
dark patterns upon the sunlit ground made that portion
of the earth seem porous and insubstantial. And then
again that drum-like beating in the depths of his heart
brought up the vision of Christie Malakite, huddled and
crouched, as he had seen her on the day of the Fair.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Making no attempt this time to restrain his thoughts,
he discovered, as he gave himself up to his mental disloyalty,
a curious emotional phenomenon. He discovered
that the peculiar glamour which had always hovered for
him like a diaphanous cloud round the impersonal idea
of girlhood, had concentrated itself upon the image of
Christie. He plunged into a very strange aspect of his
feelings, as he stood on those cobblestones and stared
at those dark shadows. The thought of Gerda’s warmth
gave him a voluptuous thrill, direct, earthy, full of honest
and natural desire. But he recognized now that there
hovered over the personality of this other girl something
more subtle than this—nothing less, in fact, than that
evasive aura of mysterious girlishness—the platonic idea,
so to speak, of the mystery of all young girls, which was
to him the most magical thing in the whole world. What
had drawn him from the beginning to Gerda had been
her wonderful beauty, and after that her original personality,
her childish character. He could see Gerda’s
face now, at this moment, before him—he could catch
the tones of her voice. He could feel how lovely she was,
as he held her and caressed her. Christie’s face, on the
contrary, was all vague in his memory; her voice was
vague; the touch of her hand was vague. It was hard to
believe that he had ever had his arms about her. And
yet it was Christie who had drawn into herself all those
floating intimations of the mystery of a girl’s soul, gathered
here and there, like cowslips in green valleys, which
were above everything so precious to him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The chatter of a couple of starlings that sank to the
ground behind the wall, quarrelling and scolding,
brought him at last to himself. He pulled down his straw-hat
over his eyes and moved off homewards.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he opened the door of Number Thirty-Seven, he
found Gerda covered from head to foot in a print apron,
her head bound up in a green scarf, brushing the floor
of their parlour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You can’t come in now,” she said, “unless you want
to sit in the bedroom. I’ll be doing the kitchen presently.
It’s no good your going in there.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good Lord, child!” he expostulated, coughing and
sneezing with exaggerated emphasis, as he propped up
his stick in its accustomed corner. “The place will be
covered with dust! Why can’t you let things alone? My
mother would never have noticed whether the room was
brushed or not. It’ll take hours for all this to settle!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She rested on her great broom and surveyed him
through her cloud of sun-illumined dust-motes. Under
her gaze Wolf felt his actual body stiffen into a pose
of clumsy awkwardness. He experienced a sense of humiliating
self-consciousness. He felt like a fool, and a
treacherous fool. The gaze she fixed upon him was the
kind of gaze the Olympian dawn-goddess might have
fixed upon her human lover at the moment when he
first betrayed the tricky and shifty mortality of his race.
He never altogether forgot that experience. It made a
hole in his armour which never, to the end of his life,
quite closed up. Henceforth, in all his thoughts of himself,
he had to allow for a weak and shaky spot in the
very groundwork of his character—a weakness that nothing
short of the clairvoyance of a woman could ever
have laid bare!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right,” he murmured stupidly. “I’ll go wherever
you want me to go, my dear.” And when he found that
she still watched him with a sort of pondering detachment,
he made a hopeless effort to read her thoughts.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her look seemed to express resentment, superiority,
irony; and yet there was tenderness in it too, and a sort
of pitiful indulgence. It was one of those looks in which
everything that is most obscure in the relation between
two people rises to the surface and can find no expression
in human words. All he knew was that this look of
hers let him off and did not let him off; though what
she could know of the vague, secret thoughts that had
been his that day, he could not conceive!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll go anywhere you like, Gerda,” he repeated
lamely; and in order to break this spell, he took up a
cloth duster she had laid on the back of a chair, and
made a motion to dust the chimneypiece.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She relaxed her reverie at this, and resumed her work
without taking further notice of him. This enabled him
to turn round again, and, with the duster still in his
hand, watch furtively every one of her gestures. The
apron she’d twisted so tightly about her body, the bit
of green muslin she had tied so quaintly around her
head, threw the whiteness of her skin and the softness
of her flesh into extraordinary relief. She went on vigorously
wielding the broom with her rounded arms, the
movements which she made displaying the loveliness of
her shoulders and the suppleness of her flanks, till Wolf
began to forget everything except the voluptuous fascination
of looking at her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This had not gone on very long before he became
aware that she knew perfectly well exactly in what mood
he was watching her. Every now and then she would
straighten her body to rest her muscles, and then, as she
lifted her hands to readjust the green muslin at the
back of her head, the contours of her young breasts
under the tight-fitting apron assumed the nobility of
Pheidian sculpture. Whenever she did this she glanced
at him under dreamy, abstracted eyelids, and she seemed
to know well that what of all things he wanted most at
that moment was just to make rough, reckless, self-obliterating
love to her. And she seemed to know, too,
that if she let him do that, just then, some indescribable
advantage she had won over him would be altogether
lost. Across an unfathomable gulf she shot these glances
at him, the thick dust-gendered sun-motes flashing and
gyrating between them like the spilled golden sands of
some great overturned hour-glass.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Under the pressure of his conflicting feelings, Wolf’s
heart contracted within him; and the pride of his threatened
life-illusion gathered about it, like broken bubbles
of quicksilver gathering against the sides of a globe of
crystal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At last, throwing down the duster, he sprang towards
her, driven by the blind, unconscious cunning of a predatory
animal and by sheer, exasperated desire. But the
girl slipped away from him, laughing like a hunted
oread, and, lifting her great broom between them, escaped
round the edge of the parlour-table, from which
she had removed the cloth. Red in the face now, and
breathing hard and fast, he pursued her obstinately; and
they both ran, panting and hot, round and round that
polished expanse of wood, that mocked him like a shining
shield. In her flight she dropped the broom, and he
in his clumsy pursuit stumbled and almost fell over it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he gave up; because, in a single flash of the
dark-lantern of his self-esteem, he saw this whole incident
between them just as Bob Weevil would have seen
it, had he been pressing his inquisitive face against their
window-pane. But as they stood there, stock-still, panting
like two animals and staring at each other across the
polished wood, it came into his head that if there had
been nothing more subtle than that table between them,
this game of theirs would have been full of a rich delight
for both of them, Bob Weevil or no Bob Weevil!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Heavily he drew his breath, watching the tiny drops
of perspiration on her forehead, and her panting bosom.
“She’s a complete stranger to me!” he said to himself,
with a puzzled sigh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll never catch me like that, Wolf,” gasped Gerda,
with a melodious chuckle; “so you’d better give up and
admit you’re beaten.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But he thought to himself: “She thinks she’s acting
the naughty child. She thinks she’s ruffled my dignity.
She thinks I’m a pompous ass, who can’t play naturally
with a girl in that sort of way.” He moved from the table,
and, throwing himself into a wicker-chair, lit a cigarette.
“But I could, I could,” he thought, “<span class='it'>if only</span>—oh, damn
all this business of loving girls! It’s getting out of my
control; it’s getting too much for me!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Through their open window came the clear, ringing
notes of the thrush in the ash-tree, along with that curious
scent of honeysuckle mixed with pigs’ dung which
was their familiar atmosphere. She, too, heard the thrush,
and, balancing the broom against a chair, walked to the
window and leaned against the side of it, her profile
toward him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What would I feel,” he said to himself, “if she started
whistling her blackbird-song now?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Gerda displayed no desire for whistling. Her face
looked pale and a little sad; and leaning there, with
her forehead resting upon one of her bare arms as it lay
along the woodwork of the window, she seemed to be
lost in concentrated thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt a sudden longing to go across to her and
comfort her—comfort her about those errant feelings of
his own that it was impossible to believe she had intercepted
in their secret passage through his brain! He
couldn’t, surely, at that moment, announce to her Darnley’s
plan?</p>

<p class='pindent'>What he actually did was neither to go up to her nor
to tell her about the projected visit. He rose to his feet,
and said abruptly: “Well! What about lunch, my dear?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At this remark she lifted up her head from her arm
with a jerk, dropped her hand to her side, and, giving
him one quick look of unspeakable reproach, went out
without a word into the kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Damn!” he thought to himself. “She can’t be a witch!
She <span class='it'>can’t</span> have the power to read a person’s thoughts!
Besides, what <span class='it'>did</span> I think? Nothing beyond what everyone
thinks sometimes; wild, crazy, outrageous nonsense!
It must be her mother. That old trot must have come
round, after all.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He resumed his seat in the wicker-chair; but he felt
too miserable even to light a cigarette.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His obscure distress swathed every one of the thrush’s
notes with a thick soot-coloured wrapping, so that they
flapped at him like so many black flags. On the gusts
of hedge-scent and ditch-scent his discomfort rose and
fell, rocking him up and down in swart desolation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wish I’d gone straight up to her at the window
just now,” he said to himself. “I can’t bear to have her
looking like that. Christ saw a man under a fig-tree, or
whatever it was; and I suppose a girl can see a man
under a lime-tree and read his thoughts like a map!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He threw off his gloom as well as he could, and walked
slowly into the kitchen. There he found her absent-mindedly
laying the table for a meal of bread and cheese.
He mechanically started helping her, getting out the
knives and forks from the dresser-drawer and uncorking
a bottle of beer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When the meal was ready she untied her apron, removed
the muslin from her head, washed her hands at
the sink, and then, instead of taking her place opposite
him, stood wavering and helpless in the middle of the
room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think I’ll go out for a breath of air,” she announced.
“I must have swallowed too much dust. I’m
not hungry.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had already taken his seat; and, as she spoke,
instead of moving away from him, as her remark suggested,
she made a queer little helpless movement towards
him. This time he <span class='it'>did</span> know what to do. He jumped
up and sprang towards her, and hugged her tightly to his
heart, overcoming her weak resistance, pressing her
cheek, now quickly wet with tears, against his own. They
remained thus for some seconds, with their arms round
each other, but without a word, leaving the parlour-clock
and the incorrigible thrush to deal as they pleased
with the passing of time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At length he withdrew his clasp, and, making her sit
down at the table, filled her glass with foaming ale.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The mellowness of the drink, combined with the obvious
sincerity of his embrace, seemed to drive away the
unhappy mood that obsessed her. She turned to the meal
before them and began eating with relish. As they ate
they talked quietly of what they would prepare for his
mother’s tea. Wolf found it wise at present to say nothing
of Mrs. Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they were satisfied, however, and after he had
handed her a cigarette—for it always amused him to
see the childishly incompetent way Gerda smoked—he
plunged boldly into the matter of their visit to the bookseller’s
shop. With one part of his heart he wished this
project at the devil; but he said to himself it would be
absurd to disappoint Darnley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If you’re willing not to wash up and not to dress
till we get back, we could easily go for just an hour.
We really owe Christie a visit; and Darnley’s being there
makes an excuse.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why ought we to go to Christie’s? She ought to come
and see us!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gerda, you know how it is! You know what she’s
like. Besides, we’ve only asked her that once, when Bob
and Lobbie were here. Let’s go now; there’s a dear girl!
We’ll have plenty of time to get cleaned up before tea.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda seemed to struggle with herself for a moment;
and then she yielded with the most charming grace.
“All right,” she said, getting up; “only we must run
in to Pimpernel’s on the way.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s spirits rose high as they left the house. He
chuckled sardonically in his heart at his own elation.
“The truth must be,” he said to himself, “that I’m simply
infatuated with both of them—that I want to snatch at
Christie and yet not lose my hold on my sweet Gerda.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sight of the shop-girl in Pimpernel’s, however,
brought down his happiness a great many pegs. He had
completely forgotten Mrs. Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But he said nothing till they were well out of the shop,
and well on their way down High Street. Then he began:
“Oh, I met your mother this morning, Gerda. We
talked a bit, and I can’t remember how it came about, but
she went off finally with the idea that I’d asked her to
tea this afternoon. And I’m afraid I didn’t mention to her
that my mother’s coming; so we’d better be prepared
for her turning up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The effect of this information was startling. Gerda
drew her arm away from him and stopped dead-still
where they were, which was in front of a butcher’s shop;
and they let the afternoon marketers jostle past them
unheeded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. have asked .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mother .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to tea!” she
gasped; and he was staggered at the dismay upon her
face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well?” he said, pulling her into the butcher’s porch
to avoid the crowd. “It won’t be so very awful, will
it? My mother can be adaptable and decent enough at a
pinch.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda looked at him with such flashing eyes that he
drew back as if she had hit him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Are you mad, Wolf?” she whispered hoarsely. “I
can’t understand you today! What’s the matter with you?
You rush off without a word this morning. You come
back looking as if you’d met a ghost. You drag me out
here to see your friend, who wants me no more than a
cat! And now <span class='it'>this</span>, on the top of everything! It’s too
much! I tell you it’s too much! I’m going home.” And
suiting her action to her words, she broke away from
him and began rapidly retracing her steps.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf ran after her and caught her by the arm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gerda! Gerda darling!” he cried, regardless of the
people who were passing them. “I can’t bear this. Let
me come back with you. I don’t care a damn about
seeing Christie!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I won’t have you come with me, Wolf. I won’t! I
won’t! Do you want me to make a scene in the street?
Go to Christie’s, I tell you! That’s where you belong.
I’ve known you wanted to go to her ever since she came
that day with the boys. Go! Go! Go! I <span class='it'>won’t</span> have you
with me!” And she started off almost at a run, her face
white and her eyes dazed and staring.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf remained motionless and stood watching her
while long minutes passed over his head. It seemed impossible
that that should be his Gerda, going off in a
rage! But even as he stood hesitating, her figure disappeared
among the people.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned wearily round then and resumed his walk
down the street in absent-minded gloom. He hardly knew
what he was doing; but he had a vague idea of wandering
about the streets for a time, and then returning to
Preston Lane. His feet carried him, however, steadily on
till he found himself opposite the bookseller’s shop.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“In for a penny, in for a pound,” he said to himself.
And then the thoughts which he believed at that moment
were what dominated his action formed themselves in his
brain into some such words as these: “I’ve absolutely no
heart for seeing Christie now, or Darnley either! But I
suppose it would be an absurd piling up of misunderstandings
if I disappointed them.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Grasping the handle of his stick tightly in his hand,
and seeing Gerda’s stricken face and wild, tearless stare
in the very midst of the doorway, he entered the shop.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found the old man amidst a pile of books, murmuring
with bent head over a volume bound in vellum,
which he was showing to a customer, evidently a stranger
to the place. Mr. Malakite did not hear him enter, and
Wolf found himself looking with a queer interest at that
bowed back and grizzled head. What did it feel like, as
the days went on, to know that one possessed, only five
miles away, a child like Olwen, the daughter of a daughter?
Did the old man ever see Olwen? Did he know
anything of the child’s thoughts? Did he want to know
anything? A chance movement made by the customer
brought Wolf now into the bookseller’s vision. A startled
look passed for a second over the old man’s face, but he
betrayed no other sign of embarrassment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-afternoon, Mr. Solent,” he said quietly. “Have
you come to see me or to see Miss Malakite?” And then,
without waiting for an answer: “You’ll find her in the
room upstairs. Mr. Otter has just gone.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf passed through the shop, and, hurriedly running
up the little staircase, knocked at Christie’s door.
The effect upon him of this unexpected news of Darnley’s
departure was something beyond what he could possibly
have foreseen. The stricken face of Gerda vanished completely,
and Gerda herself became what his mother was,
or what Miss Gault was, or what his father’s grave was—one
of the fixed landmarks in his life’s landscape, but
no longer the centre of his life. That hidden drum, which
was neither exactly in his heart nor exactly in the pit of
his stomach, beat so loudly as he waited at Christie’s
door, that it seemed as if that oblong shape of discoloured
wood, the very markings of which were voluble,
were ready to open now upon something completely new
to his experience. That word of the old man, “Mr. Otter
has gone,” kept repeating itself in his mind as he waited.
“Mr. Otter has gone. Mr. Otter has gone.” The phrase
became a floating cloud of tremulous expectation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Christie did open the door, and they had taken
each other’s hand, Wolf felt as if he had been doing
nothing all his life but wait for this moment. He had
the feeling that the man and girl who now proceeded
to utter broken and fragmentary commonplaces to each
other were acting as automatic figures behind whose
gestures two long-separated spirits were rushing together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Several seconds passed before Christie had the power
to make a move to find a chair for herself or to give a
sign for him to be seated; but when he did sink down
at last, still talking of anything that came into his head,
a sense of such relief swept into his soul that it was as if
some spear-head, that had been in his flesh without his
knowing it, for days and weeks, had suddenly been
pulled out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then, without the least disturbance of the atmosphere
of that small room, he suddenly found that
those two nodding masks had vanished into thin air,
and that there was no barrier of any sort left between the
real Wolf and the real Christie. Naturally and easily he
found himself taking for granted this strange new discovery
of what was between them. He thought within
himself: “She knows everything. I’ll leave everything
to her.” And he suddenly discovered that he was talking
freely and openly about all the people of his life, and
about Gerda, too. He discovered that to talk to Christie
was like talking to himself or thinking aloud. And he
recalled how he had been struck, the very first time they
met, by this ease and naturalness with which the lightest
thought flowed back and forth between them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And all the while, even as he was whimsically telling
her about the unlucky tea-party arranged for that afternoon,
the contour of her half-averted face bending over
a piece of needlework she had blindly taken up, and the
way her instep looked with the thin leather strap of her
shoe across it, gave him a sensation completely different
from anything he had ever known before. What he really
felt was that this was the first feminine creature with
whom he had ever been left alone. In comparison with
this diffused and thrilling feeling, permeating everything
around them, his amorousness for Gerda seemed
like playful lust, directed toward some beautiful statue.
The slender little figure before him, with those thin
hands and those touchingly thin legs, drew into her personality,
at that moment, every secret of girlhood that
had ever troubled him. Coming to him like the fragrance
of wood-mosses to a city-dweller, the consciousness that
this dreamlike figure was really alive and tangible
seemed to melt his bones within him. Those mystic syllables,
“a girl,” “a young girl,” had always remained
at the back of his mind like a precious well-watered
flower-bed, but a bed empty of any living growth. Nothing,
he now knew, in his life with Gerda had stirred
the earth of that mystic bed. But here, in the centre of
that bed, was a living, breathing plant, making everything
around it enchanted and transparent by the diffused
loveliness of its presence. This passive entity in
front of him, with her honey-pale oval face, her long
eyelashes, her thin legs, her faintly outlined childish
figure, was the only true, real, actual living girl in all
the earth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The minutes slipped by, and Wolf found himself, to
his surprise, even talking to her about Olwen. So far
from this extraordinary topic agitating her, she seemed
to find a deep relief in speaking of it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Were you old enough to realize what was going on
between them?” Wolf asked her at last.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie nodded her head and smiled a little. “The
odd thing is,” she said gently, “that there never seemed
to me anything strangely unnatural in it. I don’t think
Mother ever was the right person for Father. I think
from her earliest childhood there was a peculiar link
between him and my sister.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But it killed your mother, didn’t it?” murmured
Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie was silent for a moment, a queer, pondering
frown on her face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t think so,” she said in a low voice. “Everyone
said so; but I don’t believe it. I think it had begun long
before that. It wasn’t <span class='it'>she</span> who did it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>These last words were hardly audible.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf pressed her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who did it, then?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie looked at him gravely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you believe in spirits?” she asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He laughed a little.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, no more than in anything else!” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My mother was Welsh,” she went on. “She used to
tell us the wildest stories about her ancestors. Once she
actually told us she was descended from Merlin. Merlin’s
mother was a nun. Did you know that, Wolf?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No wonder you’re a bit inhuman,” he said. And
then, after a pause: “Did you and your sister write to
each other after they sent her away? Was she unhappy
about Olwen?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie’s brown eyes became for a minute fixed upon
vacancy, as if she were scrutinizing some far-away mental
image. When she turned them upon him, however,
they had an angry and yet humorous gleam.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I sent her money to come back,” she said. “I would
have had her here in spite of them. Her last letter—I’ll
show it to you one day—was full of excitement. If
I’d been as old as I am now, they should never have
sent her away.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did Selena Gault do it?” asked Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl nodded. “She and Mr. Smith. They had the
law on their side.” She paused and drew a long breath.
“Law or no law,” she cried, passionately, with flushed
cheeks, “if I’d been older I’d have stopped them! I was
too young,” she added.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf got up from his seat and stood regarding her.
Every aspect of her figure, every flicker upon her face,
gave him the feeling that he was regarding a young
aspen-tree, porous to wind-blown alternations of light
and shadow.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s wonderful to be able to talk freely to anyone as
I can with you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. now we’re alone.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I sent Darnley away,” was all she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>These words of hers hung suspended in the air between
them. They were so sweet to Wolf that he felt
unwilling to make the least response. He just allowed
them to evaporate, syllable by syllable, into the midsummer
warmth of that pleasant room. Christie’s eyelids
drooped over the piece of sewing she held in her
hands, and he noticed that she was turning this strip of
muslin over and over between her fingers, smoothing it
out upon her lap, first one side and then the other. The
poignancy of her shyness increased his awareness of the
suspense between them; and to loosen the spell he turned
his head a little and glanced at the mantelpiece, on which
was a china bowl, full of bluebells, late, long-stalked
primroses, and pink campions and meadow-orchids. His
own mind kept beating itself against the unknown
against that fatal <span class='it'>next moment</span> which drew to itself the
dust-motes of the air, the scent of the wild-flowers, the
warm wind blowing in through the open window.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Will she let me make love to her? Will she let me?”
was the burden of his thought; and as he stared at that
bunch of flowers, especially at one solitary bluebell that
hung down over the brim of the white bowl and had
gathered a tinge of faint rose-carmine upon its hyacinthine
bloom, he felt as though the “to be or not to be”
of that tense moment depended upon chance as inscrutable,
as fluctuating, as the light, falling this way, falling
that way—light and shadow wavering together—upon
that purple-blue at the bowl’s edge.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Never had he been more aware of the miracle of
flower-petals, of the absolute wonder of this filmy vegetable
fabric, so much older, just as it is so much more
lovely, in the history of our planet than the flesh of beasts
or the feathers of birds or the scales of fishes!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl’s words, “I sent Darnley away,” seemed to
melt into that wild-flower bunch she had picked and
placed there; and the pallor of the primroses, the perilous,
arrowy faintness of their smell, became his desire
for her; and the rough earth-mould freedom of the
campion-stalks, with their wood-sturdy pink buds, became
the lucky solitude she had made for him!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Will she let me make love to her?” The longing
to risk the first movement toward his purpose struggled
now in his mind with that mysterious restraint, so
tenuous and yet so strong, of the girl’s obscure embarrassment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you pick those flowers yesterday?” he broke out
suddenly; and he was secretly surprised at the loudness
of his own voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The day before,” she murmured; and then, without
closing her mouth, which, with the droop of her under-lip,
took on an almost vacant look, she frowned a little,
as she fixed her steady gaze full upon him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His own eyes plunged once more into the green-shadowed
depths of that midsummer nosegay. Its pale
primroses seemed to sway, in the wind, over their crumpled
leaves, as they would have done where she had
actually picked them among the wood-rubble and the
fungus-growths of their birthplace. The moist bluebell-stalks,
so full of liquid greenness beneath their heavy
blooms, seemed to carry his mind straight into the hazel-darkened
spaces where she had found them. These also
belonged to the embarrassment of that figure beside him.
These also, with the cool greenery of the sturdy campions,
were the very secret of that “next moment,”
which floated now, with the mocking sun-motes, untouched
and virginal in the air about them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf knew well enough the peculiar limitations of
his own nature. He knew well enough that any great
surge of what is called “passion” was as impossible to
him as was any real remorse about making love. What
he felt was an excitement that trembled on the margin—on
the fluctuating fine edge—between amorous desire
for the slim frame of this mysterious girl and the thrilling
attraction of unexplored regions in her soul.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His feeling was like a brimming stream between reedy
banks, where a wooden moss-covered dam prevents any
spring-flood, but where the water, making its way round
the edge of the obstacle, bends the long, submerged
grasses before it, as it sweeps forward.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Two images troubled him just a little—Gerda’s white,
tense face as it had looked when she left him on the
street, and, with this, a vague uncomfortable memory of
the figure on the Waterloo steps. But, in his intensely
heightened consciousness of this “suspended” moment,
he deliberately steered the skiff of his thought away from
both those reefs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly he found himself risen from his seat and
standing against the mantelpiece! He lifted the flowers
to his face; and then, putting down the bowl, he inserted
his fingers in it, pressing them down between the stalks
into the water. He noticed that the water felt warm to
his touch, like the water of a sun-warmed pool; and the
fantastic idea came into his head that by making this
gesture he was in some occult way invading the very
soul of the girl who had arranged them there. Christie
may or may not have read his thoughts. At any rate, he
now became aware that she was standing beside him,
and with deft, swift touches was correcting the rough
confusion he had made in her nosegay.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The bluebell-scent is the one that dominates,” he
murmured. “You smell them, and see if I’m not right!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As she leaned forward, he allowed his hand to slide
caressingly down her side, drawing her slender body,
with a scarcely perceptible pressure, against his own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His heart was beating fast now, and a delicious predatory
thrill was shivering through his nerves. Christie
made not the least attempt to extricate herself from his
caresses. She permitted him to bend her slim body this
way and that way in his wanton excitement. But when
he kissed her, she bent her neck so far round that it was
her cheek and not her lips he kissed; and soon after
that she slipped away from him and sank down exhausted
in her former seat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The look she gave him now, as they stared at each
other, confused and out of breath, was completely inscrutable
to him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re not annoyed with me, Christie?” he panted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a flicker of anger in her eyes at this.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Of course not,” she answered, “What do you take
me for? I’m not as mean as that. I’m not a puritanical
fool.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, then .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. well, then?” he muttered, approaching
her chair and standing over her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m not one least bit annoyed with you,” she repeated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The faint flush that had now appeared in her cheeks,
and the complicated wistfulness of her expression, disarmed
and enchanted him. He stooped down to her and
stroked with the tips of his fingers the white blue-veined
skin under her lace wristbands; but as he looked at her
now, there was a certain virginal detachment about her
thin ankles and about those lace-ruffled hands which
irritated and provoked him by its inhuman remoteness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You puzzle me completely,” he remarked, returning
rather awkwardly to his former seat and surveying her
with a humorous frown.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She lifted up her head from her work. “Well? Why
not? We haven’t known each other very long.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her words released his pent-up irritation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You make me feel funny, Christie,” he said. “As if
we’d lost each other in a wood.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She held her head very high at this and her eyes grew
defiant.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know I’m no good at these things, Wolf. I never
have been. Girls are supposed to carry off moments like
this. I don’t know how they do it. I seem to be completely
lacking in that sort of tact.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His irritation increased as he found it impossible to
follow her thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tact?” he re-echoed sarcastically. “Good Lord! Tact
is the last thing I want from <span class='it'>you</span>.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She spoke gravely now, but with evident vexation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s the use of talking like this, Wolf? It’s growing
only too clear that we don’t understand each
other.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His only retort to this was once more to murmur the
word “tact” with a grim iteration.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her brown eyes looked really angry now.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why are men so stupid?” she cried. “When I said
<span class='it'>that</span>, I meant pretending something that wasn’t my real
self. It’s because I’ve been absolutely natural with you
that you’ve got angry with me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were both silent after this, and Wolf stared at
the half-open window, through which the summer wind
was blowing into the room in little, eddying gusts.
Christie took up her sewing; and the stir of her thin
fingers and the waving of the light curtains were the only
movements in that flower-scented air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>By slow degrees, as he surreptitiously watched her,
the harmony of his mind began to come back; and with
this harmony there came in upon him from all that
green West Country landscape stretching away toward
the Severn on one side and toward the Channel on the
other, a sort of dumb, inarticulate reproach. What were
they doing, he and this girl, who were, as he well divined,
so exquisitely adapted to understand each other, letting
themselves be divided by such straws, such puffballs
of difference?</p>

<p class='pindent'>From fading cuckoo-flowers by the banks of the Lunt,
from brittle mother-of-pearl shells, wet and glittering,
on the Weymouth sands, from the orange-speckled bellies
of great newts in Lenty Pond, there came to him, between
those waving curtains, a speechless protest. Brief
was his life .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. brief was Christie Malakite’s life.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Times like this at best would be rare. He could see himself
returning to his tea-party and letting it all go! He
could see Christie pouring out tea for her father and
letting it all go! Perhaps—such was his pride and such
was hers—this June afternoon, which might have been,
but for this trivial discord, as perfect as a green bough,
would stand out in his memory peeled and jagged, its
sap all running out, its leaves drooping.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Forgive me, Christie,” he said gravely. “Please forgive
me and don’t think any more about it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl looked up from her work, her hands folded
in her lap.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You don’t mean,” she said slowly, “because of <span class='it'>that</span>?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her nod of the head in the direction of the mantelpiece,
where he had first caressed her, made clear to him
what her words implied.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He got up from his chair and stood in front of her,
looking down at her lifted face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No,” he said. “I didn’t mean because of ‘that.’ I
meant because we misunderstood each other; which was
all my fault.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie began to smile. “I’m not prudish or unfeeling
in things like that,” she said. “But I’ve a queer nature,
Wolf. I love the romance of being in love, and I like
you, Wolf, better than anyone I’ve ever met; and I like
you to make love to me. It’s only .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it’s only that—with
the life I’ve had and the mother I had—I seem to
have none of an ordinary girl’s feelings in these things.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf began pacing up and down the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m queer myself, Christie,” he said after a pause,
stopping once more in front of her. “So there we are! It
appears that we’re a fair pair! And if you want to know
what I feel at this moment, I’ll tell you. I feel deliciously
happy. You are a witch, Christie, and I don’t wonder
your mother maintained she was descended from Merlin.
I feel I could tell you every secret thought I have in
the world. And so, by God, I will! It’s an incredible
chance that I should have found you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He threw his cigarette into the fire and walked to the
window.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What a view you’ve got here!” he said. “That’s the
corner of Babylon Hill, isn’t it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The window was already open at the top; but he
pulled it down as far as it would go, and leaned out of
it, looking across the entanglement of slate roofs to the
green incline beyond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The wind’s northeast, isn’t it?” he remarked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She got up and came over to him and stood beside
him, and presently he felt her fingers slip into his own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“North-northeast,” she said; and these words, when
he thought of them afterwards, brought back every
flicker of his feelings, as he stood stiffly there clutching
her hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where does that lane go?” he asked. “Do you see
what I mean? That narrow little one below those Scotch
firs.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Over there?” the girl questioned. “To the left of
Poll’s Camp, do you mean?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. where that clump
of bushes is!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s Gwent Lane,” she answered. “And it leads to
a whole maze of lanes further on. I’m fond of going
to the Gwent Lanes. You hardly ever meet anyone there.
It’s as if they had been designed to keep traffic away and
strangers away. Sometimes on Summer days when Father
doesn’t want me, I take my lunch and a book and stay
in the Gwent Lanes all day. I often never meet a
soul.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was silent for a second or two; and he realized
that a crowded mass of personal memories was flowing
through her mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Some lovely afternoons I’ve had,” she went on, “sitting
with my back to a gate and looking at the hedge-parsley.
When the corn’s yellow and the poppies are out,
I always sit inside the field, with my parasol over my
book. I can smell the peculiar bitter smell now of the
elder-leaves behind me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She drew her fingers away from him and made of her
two hands a support for her chin upon the woodwork
of the open window. Wolf thought this chin of hers was
the smallest he had ever seen. He, too, remained silent,
thinking of similar memories of his own, secret and solitary
and personal; and he was astonished to note how
natural it seemed to both of them, this deliberate indulgence
in egoistic recollections.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“North-northeast, did you say?” His voice sounded
irrelevant even to his own ears. In some queer way he
felt as if he had been sharing these furtive physical
memories with the girl at his side. He even felt as if their
having shared them had been a kind of love-making
more subtle and delicate than any erotic dalliance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt as if he could share with this elfin creature
a thousand feelings that no other person could possibly
understand—share with her all those profoundly physical
sensations—and yet mystical, too—that made up the
real undercurrent of his whole life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She would understand my ‘mythology,’ ” he said to
himself. “No one but she would; no one!” And then he
thought: “I believe my life is going to open out now, as
if I really had some invisible tutelary Power directing
me!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They turned away simultaneously from the window,
and once more sat down.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you ever feel,” he said, “as if one part of your
soul belonged to a world altogether different from this
world—as if it were completely disillusioned about all
the things that people make such a fuss over and yet
were involved in something that was very important?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She looked straight into his face. “I wouldn’t put it
like that,” she said. “But I’ve always known what it was
to accept an enormous emptiness round me, echoing and
echoing, and I sitting there in the middle, like a paper-doll
reflected in hundreds of mirrors.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf screwed up his eyes and bit his under-lip.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You haven’t been as happy in your mind as I’ve
been in <span class='it'>my</span> mind,” he said with a kind of wistfulness;
“but I often feel as if I were unfairly privileged .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
as if some invisible god were unjustly favouring me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
quite beyond my deserts.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t think you’re as favoured as you fancy you
are,” said Christie, with the ghost of a smile. But Wolf
went on:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you know, Chris, I think I’m especially favoured
in my scepticism. I’m sceptical about the reality of everything;
even about the reality of Nature. Sometimes I
think that there are several ‘Natures’ .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. several ‘Universes,’
in fact .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. one inside the other .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. like Chinese
boxes.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know what you mean,” said the young girl hurriedly;
and her eyes, as she looked at him, grew luminous
with that indescribable excitement of mental sympathy
that can bring tears from something deeper than passion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf, as he received this intimation, said to himself:
“I can think aloud with her. Perhaps one day I’ll tell
her about my ‘mythology’!” And there came over him,
like a warm enveloping under-tide in which great crimson
seaweeds were swaying, an unutterable sense of happiness.
“Oh, I hope Gerda is all right!” he thought.
And then, with a concentrated effort of his will, as if he
were addressing a host of servile genii: “I <span class='it'>command</span> that
Gerda shall be all right!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It occurred to him at that moment, with a humorous
force, that his father wouldn’t have been a man to
allow such scruples as these to impinge upon his mind
at such a juncture.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Had you any idea,” he said suddenly, “that Mattie
wasn’t Albert Smith’s child?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I soon saw the likeness to you, anyway,” Christie replied
evasively, “the first day Father brought you to see
me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I like Mattie so much,” he went on; “but her resemblance
to me can’t be said to improve her looks. Has
anyone ever made love to her, do you think?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie laughed. “Well, <span class='it'>you</span> must be nice to her, anyway,
Wolf dear, to make up in case they haven’t.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I should be afraid of Miss Gault’s sending her off to
Australia!” he said with a chuckle, and then felt curiously
relieved to find that the grossness of this rather
clumsy jest did not shock his companion. “Nothing
shocks her,” he said to himself; and his mind took a
long flight to his years in London, where, except for
his mother, there was no one to whom he could have
talked as he had done this afternoon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I must be off,” he said, rather wearily, when
these thoughts had finished their circle and had sunk
down in the manner of birds on a bough. “I’ve got an
uncomfortable home-coming before me, what with one
thing and another.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t make too much of it,” she said, opening the
door for him and holding both handles of it with her
hands, so as to avoid any definite farewell. “Gerda will
be so thankful to have got through it, that when your
two mothers leave she’ll be radiant again.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope she won’t be too radiant <span class='it'>before</span> they leave,”
retorted Wolf grimly. “I don’t want many repetitions of
this particular tea-party.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She kept the door open till he was half-way downstairs,
and they nodded rather dolorously at each other
across the banisters. He heard the door shut as he entered
the shop below, and a pang passed through him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he walked rapidly home, he found himself engaged
in an imaginary dialogue with his father.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The skeleton under those obstinate plantains kept
grinning mockingly in reply to every argument. “Life is
short,” said the skeleton, “and the love of girls is the
only escape from its miseries.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s not so short as all that,” retorted the son, “and
in every Paradise there is a snake!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap11'>THE TEA-PARTY</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>He found on his arrival that his mother had already
appeared. To his great surprise he discovered her
standing by their kitchen-stove, with Gerda’s apron over
her dress, helping to make the toast. He was still more
surprised at the way Gerda received him. She was flushed
and happy—laughing and jesting as if they had parted
the very best of friends.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How’s Christie?” she asked casually. “What do you
think, Mrs. Solent, of his going off to see Miss Malakite
when I’ve got company? I’m sure that’s not what you’d
approve of.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t approve of his saying nothing about that
pretty frock you’ve got on! What do you think of it,
Wolf? Do you know, when I got here, she was upstairs,
crying her lovely eyes out? And all because she thought
she hadn’t a proper dress to welcome her grand mother-in-law
in! We soon settled <span class='it'>that</span> little job, didn’t we, my
dear?” And Wolf beheld, to his amazement, his mother
putting one of her strong arms caressingly about Gerda’s
waist, and Gerda responding to this with a lingering,
provocative glance, such as he himself was wont
to receive when the girl was in her most docile
mood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I heard her crying up there in her room,” went on
the elder woman, “and I ran straight up, and there she
was, pretty as a picture in her white shift, and all the
bed covered with frocks! She says she’s had this one
since she was sixteen; but it suits her perfectly, doesn’t
it, Wolf?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf surveyed the girl gravely. She wore a long,
straight muslin dress, with short sleeves, creamy-white
and covered with pale little roses. Never had she looked
so enchanting.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re certainly a good lady’s-maid, Mother,” he
said solemnly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s told me you’re expecting another mother this
afternoon,” continued Mrs. Solent, releasing Gerda and
proceeding to arrange the slices of toast upon a plate.
“Now then, where’s that loaf? I’ll cut the bread-and-butter.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It became Wolf’s destiny to stand for the next quarter
of an hour, figuratively speaking, “upon one leg,” while
he watched what seemed to resemble the most piquant
of flirtations going on between these two.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tea-tray was “laid” at last, in the most approved
manner, on that very parlour-table round which he had
pursued the girl in such troubled agitation so short a
time before; and Mrs. Solent, Gerda’s apron removed,
showed herself in the most fashionable of all her garden-party
gowns. Gerda seemed unable to keep her eyes off
her, and kept touching with the tips of her fingers first
one elegant frill and then another, hovering about her
like a slim white butterfly round a purple orchid.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There’s Mother!” she cried at length. “Fetch the
kettle, Wolf!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The countenance of Mrs. Torp was as a book in
which one could “read strange matters,” as she contemplated
the scene before her. Wolf, with the teapot in
one hand and the kettle in the other, vociferated a boisterous
welcome, drowning the politer words of his
mother.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda, having removed Mrs. Torp’s tasselled cloak,
sat her plumb-down at the table, straightening with a familiarly
affectionate jerk the ribboned bonnet which
adorned her head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t ’ee fidget wi’ me old hat, Gerdie,” murmured
the visitor. “ ’Tis a very good hat, though maybe ’tain’t
as aleet as some folks can afford. So thee be Mr. Solent’s
mummy, be ’ee? Well, and ’a favour’n about the
cheeks, ’sknow! A body could reason there was some
blood twixt ye; though in these which-way times ’tis hard
to speak for sure.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, we must do our best not to quarrel, Mrs. Torp,
as they say all mothers do,” threw out Mrs. Solent
briskly, watching with some anxiety the unusual amount
of sugar that Gerda was placing at the bottom of all the
teacups.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How much milk, Mrs. Solent?” enquired the girl
lightly. “I don’t expect our Blacksod milk is as good as
yours at King’s Barton.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This society-tone was so obviously put on to impress
the young lady’s mother, that Mrs. Solent hadn’t the
heart to explain, till the time for her second cup, that
she couldn’t bear sugar. She swallowed the sweet mixture
in hurried gulps; and Wolf chuckled to see her
trying to take away the taste by rapid mouthfuls of
bread-and-butter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How be thee’s schoolmasterin’ getting along, Mr. Solent?
My old man—that be our Gerdie’s Dad, ma’am—do always say them Grammar boys be above theyselves,
what with one thing and t’other. He cotchit two on ’em,
the last buryin’ ’ee had, stealing of they bones. Not
that they were proper human-like bones .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. if ’ee understand
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. for ’ee do always bury <span class='it'>them</span> religious-deep.
They were hosses’ bones, seems so, from what ’ee
do calculate. But they were more impident, them Grammar
boys, when ’ee were arter they, than if they’d been
the bones of King Balaam.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s Lobbie been doing lately, Mother?” enquired
Gerda, feeling vaguely conscious that the subject of
bones, whether human or otherwise, was inappropriate
at that moment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lob, do ’ee say? Thee may well ask what Lob be doing,
the young pert-mouthed limb! He be bringing his
Dad’s hoar hairs down to bedlam, and mine wi ’em,
that’s what the owl’s pellet be doing!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda hurriedly enquired in a ringing voice whether
Mrs. Solent wanted any cake. “Pimpernel hadn’t any
fresh kinds except this. I expect you are so used to
London confectionery, Mrs. Solent——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the visitor seemed more interested in her fellow
parent’s conversation than in anything else just then.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sons are troublesome beings, Mrs. Torp,” she said,
“but it’s nice to have them.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What <span class='it'>has</span> Lobbie been doing?” enquired Wolf, heedless
of Gerda’s frowns.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s been going over with that imp of Satan, Bob
Weevil, to Parson Valley’s. His Dad told ’en he’d lift
the skin from’s backside if he did it; but he was see’d,
only last night, out there again.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It sounds very innocent, Mrs. Torp, visiting a clergyman,”
remarked the lady.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Innocent!” cried Gerda’s mother indignantly. “Innocent
thee own self, though I do say it! ’Tis pagan
deviltries, worse nor Paul on Corinthians. I tell ’ee,
they do play blasphemous play-actings out there, same
as Lot’s wife were salted for.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Miracle-plays, is it?” asked Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How do I know what they call ’en? ’Tis small matter
for the name. Wold Dimity, up to Otters’, told I that
one girt gummuk of a lad dressed ’isself up as Virgin
Mary. If that hain’t a blasphemous cantrip, I’d like to
know what be!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I expect Mrs. Solent knows better than any of us,
Mother, what’s going on out at King’s Barton,” put in
Gerda diplomatically.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I did hear something about a miracle-play,” said
the visitor lightly; “but if the subject’s a teasing one,
for heaven’s sake let’s drop it! I think it was Mr. Urquhart
who mentioned it to me; and if I remember right
he took rather the same view of it as Mrs. Torp.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Squire Urquhart ain’t got so much standing his own
self wi’ decent folk for <span class='it'>him</span> to be top-lofty,” remarked
the other. “They do tell down our way ’twas that man’s
wicked tempers and sech-like, what drove poor young
Redfern into’s grave; but maybe, as darter says, you
know more’n we, ma’am, about King’s Barton ways. I be
glad for my part that I lives in a God-fearing daily-bread
town like Blacksod.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“By the way, Wolf,” said Mrs. Solent, speaking in
her most high-pitched voice, “I met your friend Jason
the other day in Lenty Lane, and we had quite a walk
together. We went as far as the ridge-road to Ramsgard
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you know? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. by one of those little fieldpaths.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Jason, ma’am?” commented Mrs. Torp. “<span class='it'>I</span> do
know he. I’d a-seen he, many a fine evenin’, a-traipsin
home from Three Peewits.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope you enjoyed your walk,” said Gerda, gravely
and politely, frowning at her mother.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How did you and Jason get on?” asked Wolf. “I
somehow can’t imagine you two together.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well,” said Mrs. Solent, “I can’t quite tell whether
my company pleased him or not. He talked most of the
time about my neighbour, Roger Monk. He seems to have
got into his head that the poor man spies upon him. I
tried at first to disabuse him of that idea; but he got so
agitated that I just let him go on. In the end he became
quite charming. He recited to me a poem about a woodpecker,
which I thought very pretty. He has such a nice
voice when he recites, and the evening was so lovely
after the rain that I really enjoyed it all very much.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No doubt Mr. Otter were sober as a jackdaw when ’a
walked with ’ee, ma’am. I’m not saying he isn’t a nice-spoken
gentleman, for he is. It’s not so much the drink
they talk of, along of he, down where I do live, it’s——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, Mother, please!” interrupted Gerda. “Do look,
Mother, how nicely Mrs. Solent tied my sash!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl got up from her chair and turned herself
round. This gesture was evidently adored by Mrs. Solent,
for she stretched out her arms and caught her by the
waist and pulled her down upon her knee.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I shall spoil your lovely dress,” Gerda cried nervously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re light as a feather, you sweet thing! You’re
soft as swan’s-down.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She weren’t that light, ma’am, when she made herself
stiff as pikestaff, on the day us bundled she down
church-aisle for christening,” said Mrs. Torp. “But she
were light enough, God-sakes, when she did play carry-me-over
wi’ the lads!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>All this while, Wolf was pondering in his soul how
it was that Nature had placed in the minds of all mothers,
refined or unrefined, so large a measure of the heart
of a procuress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And she were light enough——” Mrs. Torp was beginning
again, when Gerda, jumping up in haste, ran
round the table and clapped her hand over her mouth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hush, Mummy, I won’t have it!” she cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At that moment there was a loud knocking at the front-door,
and Wolf went across the passage and opened it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Bob Weevil and Lobbie hurried into the room together,
their caps in their hands. The young grocer looked a
little embarrassed at the scene before him, and made a
stiff bow to Mrs. Solent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Afternoon, marm,” he muttered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Lobbie was quite unperturbed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dad’s comed home afore his time,” he cried, “and ’a
be mumbling about his supper.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shake hands with Mrs. Solent, Lob,” said Gerda
severely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the boy had turned to his own parent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Valley said I was to ask you proper and right
for promission,” he said eagerly, “promission for——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“For <span class='it'>what</span>, ye staring toad?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Promission,” the boy went on, “for thik girt play
next Thursday. The day arter tomorrow ’tis; and all the
gentry be coming. And I be John the Baptist, what lived
upon honey and the honeycomb!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ye’ll live upon cabbage and the cabbage-stalk, ye
impident sprout! I’ve a-heerd too much of your Mr.
Valley and his goings-on.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mother .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mother!” protested the unabashed Lob.
But Mrs. Solent interrupted them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t you worry, Mrs. Torp. I’m going to that entertainment
myself, and I’ll see that this young man
comes to no harm. I understand just what you feel. These
clerical junketings are sometimes incredibly silly. But
you can trust me. We’ll keep each other in sight, won’t
we, Lobbie?” And she put her hand on the boy’s shoulder.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, of course, if you answer for him, ma’am, I
reckon I must be satisfied,” grumbled the monument-maker’s
wife.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I’ll look after him. Won’t I, Lobbie? And if Mr.
Valley keeps us all up till midnight, you shall sleep at
Lenty Cottage.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lob looked a little nervous at this prospect, but he
expressed his thanks politely, and the incident appeared
closed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Meanwhile Wolf overheard the following conversation
going on between Mr. Weevil and Gerda.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, if that isn’t the very frock you wore, Gerdie,
when we went to Weymouth, that grand excursion-day,
years ago!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, it is, Bob. Fancy your remembering! Mrs. Solent
made me put it on.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And to think of that! And to think how we climbed
down those slippery steps at the ferry, and how frightened
you were of the green seaweed getting on you, and
how we saw sea-anemones in the pools by Sandsfoot
Castle, and you couldn’t abide the gun-firing out Portland-way.
Think of that, Gerdie, the very same dress!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you think I’m too old to wear it now, Bob?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ask me another, Gerdie! But it do make anyone feel
sort of queer to see you like this. You know? It’s all
the things it brings up, what a person’s clean forgotten.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You got no more memory than a pig, Bob Weevil.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Depends who and what and when,” was the grocer’s
retort.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, don’t you worry any more about it, Mrs. Torp,”
repeated the lady in purple. “I promise to keep Mr.
Valley in order. Or if I can’t, I’ll get someone who can.
Lob shan’t make a fool of himself, or disgrace either
John the Baptist or you. I quite look forward to it. We’ll
have a fine bit of sport together, Lobbie, you and I,
flirting across the footlights!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How did you get over today, Mrs. Solent?” enquired
Gerda, cutting short Mr. Weevil’s memories with a furtive
little movement of her hand—a movement that came
as rather a surprise to Wolf, as he noted it in passing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, Roger Monk drove me,” exclaimed Wolf’s
mother. “And that reminds me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what’s the time, my
son? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Good Lord! I’ve kept the man waiting already!
I must go at once. I’m to meet him at the Three
Peewits.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll walk down with you, Mother,” said Wolf, glad
enough to get a chance of escape. “Good-bye, Mrs. Torp.
I know you’ll excuse me. Don’t hurry off, Bob. Why
don’t you keep him for supper, Gerda? And Lobbie, too,
if Mrs. Torp will let him stay?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mother and son walked leisurely down the clattering
High Street.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s certainly beautiful, your Gerda!” exclaimed the
lady, after prolonged silence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She is,” admitted Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But oh, dear! What an awful woman! Does she worry
you much, my dabchick?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Worry me, Mother? Not one little bit! I very rarely
see her, you know.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was another long pause between them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s going to happen when the History’s done,
Wolf?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It may never be done, Mother! He’s got really interested
in it at last, thank the Lord!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wolf, dear——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, Mother?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wouldn’t let Gerda have a child for quite a long
while yet.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, Mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I didn’t know that she and this Weevil boy were such
old friends.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf swung his stick. Something about the inflexible
determination of his mother’s profile, especially of her
clear-cut chin, at that moment, roused an obscure feeling
of rebellion in him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why the devil not?” he cried. “Bob’s a mere kid.
Gerda treats him exactly as she treats her brother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His voice had become high-pitched. That curious, furtive
little movement of the hand, full of old familiarities,
returned to him most teasingly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t talk too loud,” murmured his mother. “We’re
not in Lenty Lane.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why did you say that?” he asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I don’t know,” she said lightly. “Don’t take it
too seriously. I only know from old experience that
men never can be made to realize how susceptible women
are except where they themselves are concerned.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Even when they love a person?” he enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What <span class='it'>is</span> love?” said Mrs. Solent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was silent; and the conversation between them
took a less personal tone, till he saw her safely mounted
in Mr. Urquhart’s dog-cart, beside the tall man-servant.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Instead of going straight home, he walked meditatively
and slowly past the Malakite book-shop, and then
at a more rapid pace followed the road that led up
Babylon Hill. He did not turn, till, in the slanting rays
of the sinking sun, he reached that corner of the ascent
which he had noted from Christie’s window.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Could he distinguish her house among the rest? He
was not sure. The rays of the great June sun were almost
horizontal, as it sank down towards Glastonbury; and
it was all he could do, even with his eyes shaded by his
hand, to identify the portion of the town where the book-shop
was. As to seeing Christie’s window, it was impossible.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Annoyed by this refusal of Nature to humour his
mood, he advanced obstinately still further up the road,
and finally reached the stile into the field-path that led
to the turfy ramparts of Poll’s Camp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There he sat down among the tall, uncut grasses of the
wayside, and allowed the double stream of memories—those
connected with Poll’s Camp and those connected
with that invisible window below him—to contend for
the mastery in his thoughts. The extraordinary thing was
that all that poetry of his first encounter with Gerda
seemed like something that had happened to some external
portion of his nature, whereas this strange new understanding
with Christie sank so deep into his being that
it invaded regions of which he himself had hardly been
aware.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He soon found out, as he sat there, with his back
against that stile and the pungent smell of herb-Robert
in his nostrils, how far this new feeling had gone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His life had become so agitated since his arrival at
Ramsgard, that now, at this moment, he felt he had more
on his mind than he could disentangle. The spirit of the
evening fell upon him with a burden that was mysteriously
sad—sad with a multitude of gathering omens
and indistinct threats. With all the evening noises around
him—noises, some of them faint as the sighing of invisible
reeds—he became once more conscious that between
the iron-ribbed gaiety of his mother and the fixed
grin of that paternal skull in the churchyard there was
an ambiguous struggle going on, the issues of which remained
dubious as life itself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found himself crying out to that irresponsible
skull under the plantains; but the skull answered him
with nothing but cynical mockery. He found himself
turning restlessly towards his mother; but he felt that
just at the point where he needed her sympathy most
the very basic rock of her nature flung him contemptuously
back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>On and on he sat, with that sinking sun growing redder
and redder before him, and the evening murmurs
gathering in his ears; and as he sat, an immense solitude
descended upon him, and he began to realize, as
he had never realized before, how profoundly alone
upon this planet each individual soul really is.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And with this feeling there came over him a deep, disturbing
craving for Christie—a craving so intense that
the vision of all the length of all the days of his life
without her seemed more than he could bear. “Only one
life,” he thought to himself. “Only one life, between two
eternities of non-existence .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and I am proposing deliberately
to sacrifice in it the one thing that I really
want!” He hugged his knees with tightly clasped fingers,
and stared at the red orb before him, sinking now over
Christie’s very roof.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For the first time in his mortal days this great diurnal
spectacle seemed to his mind half-fantastic; as if this
were not the real sun, the sun he had known all his life,
that was descending; nor the earth he had known all his
life that was thus hiding it from his eyes. “If I do give
up Christie for Gerda,” he thought, “it will simply mean
that the one unique experience destined for me out of all
others by the eternal gods, has been deliberately thrown
away.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He bowed his head over his knees and watched the
climbing of a tiny beetle up a bending stalk of grass.
“To the universe,” he thought, “it matters no more
whether I leave Gerda for Christie than whether that
beetle reaches the top of that stalk! Gerda? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Christie? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What are they? Two skeletons covered
with flesh; one richly and flexibly covered .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. one
sparsely and meagrely covered! Two of them .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that
is all .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just two of them!” And then, bowing his
head still lower, so that the beetle and its grass-stalk almost
filled up his whole vision, he began to imagine
what it would be like if he <span class='it'>did</span> make some wild, desperate
move. What would happen, for instance, if he were to
carry Christie to London and get some job to support
them both there, hidden from all the world? Gerda
would return to her parents’ house. Old Malakite would
get on somehow or other. His mother would .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Well! What would his mother do? She had scarcely anything
in the bank. Mr. Urquhart could hardly be expected
to support her. No, it was unthinkable, impossible!
The existence of his mother, her complete dependence
on him, tied his hands fast and tight!</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then, with an overpowering surrender, there came
upon him all his old childish clinging to that woman
whose heart the licentiousness of his father had been unable
to quell. He knew his own nature to be tough
enough, but compared with his mother he was like an
oak-sapling growing in the cleft of a rock. The woman
was adamant, where he was merely obstinate. Rock-smooth
she was, where he was merely gnarled and
knotted and earth-rooted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Damn!” he muttered to himself, as he watched the
beetle turn back resignedly within an inch of the stalk’s
point, and begin a patient descent. “Damn! It’s just pure
weakness and habit!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But, oh, dear! How could he desert Gerda .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. how
could he do it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. after three lovely happy months;
and without cause or reason save his own fickle madness?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Why had he married her at all? That was the whole
blunder! He had married her because he had seduced
her. But girls were always being seduced! <span class='it'>That</span> was no
reason. No! He couldn’t get out of it. He had married
her because he had mistaken a mixture of lust and romance
for love; and if he hadn’t found Christie, he
might, to the end of his days, never have discovered his
mistake! Affection would have superseded lust; tenderness
would have superseded romance. All would have
been well. It was Christie’s appearance that had changed
everything; and there it was! Christie and he were bound
together now, come good, come ill. But as things were,
so they must remain! If his soul was Christie’s, his life
must go on being his mother’s and Gerda’s. There was
no other issue.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Abruptly he lifted up his head. The sun was so low
now that he could look straight into its great red circle
suspended above the roofs of the town. It resembled, as
he looked at it, a vast fiery tunnel, the mouth of some
colossal piece of artillery, directed full against him.
With screwed-up eyelids he returned the stare of this
blood-red cannon-mouth; and as he fronted it, it
seemed to him that a dusky figure took shape within
it, a figure resembling Jason Otter’s abominable idol.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was something so atrocious in the idea of this
dusky demon being there at all—being, so to say, the
great orb’s final <span class='it'>expression</span> as it went down—that he
leaped to his feet in indignant protest. His movement
brought the blood from his head, and the phantasm vanished.
Slowly and inevitably, with a visible sliding descent,
the red globe sank out of sight; and Wolf picked
up his hat and stick. “It must be long after eight,” he
thought. “I must get home to Gerda.”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap12'>THE SLOW-WORM OF LENTY</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>The next two months brought no outward change
in the existence of Wolf and the various people of his
life; but when August arrived, all manner of strange
developments, long prepared for under the surface, began
to manifest themselves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The trend of these developments began for the first
time to grow clear to Wolf himself on the occasion of a
small garden-party given by Mrs. Otter in her little
front-garden. He had exhausted a great deal of energy in
an attempt to entangle his mother in a more or less harmonious
conversation with Selena Gault; and it was
with a queer feeling of triumph that he left these old antagonists
drinking tea side by side, in their low chairs,
on Mrs. Otter’s lawn, to cross the grass so that he might
speak to Jason.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He came upon him in the back garden, in converse
with old Dimity Stone, who fled precipitately into her
kitchen at his approach.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was as careful not to disturb the poet’s equilibrium
as if he had been a leopard cajoling a nervous
eland. He shuffled by his side into a narrow passage
between two cucumber-frames, where they both sat down.
A solitary wood-pigeon kept repeating its diapason of
languid rapture from somewhere high up in the neighbouring
trees. In the gravel-path, quite close to where
they sat, a thrush, unruffled by their presence, cracked a
snail upon a broken piece of brick; and as Wolf made
one desultory remark after another, to set his companion
at ease, he found himself complacently squeezing with
the tips of his fingers certain sticky little bubbles of tar
that the heat of the afternoon sun drew forth from the
warm wooden planks of the frame.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I composed a poem last night,” said Jason Otter.
“And since you’re the only person who takes the least
interest in what I do, I’ll repeat it to you, if no one comes
round the corner.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d love to hear it,” said Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It begins like this.” And in a voice almost as modulated
as the wood-pigeon’s own, the drooping head by
Wolf’s side swayed slowly to the rhythm of the following
stanza:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>The Slow-Worm of Lenty curses God;</p>
<p class='line0'>He lifts his head from the heavy sod;</p>
<p class='line0'>He lifts his head where the Lenty willow</p>
<p class='line0'>Weeps green tears o’er the rain-elf’s pillow;</p>
<p class='line0'>For the rain-elf’s lover is fled and gone,</p>
<p class='line0'>And none curseth God but the Slow-Worm alone.</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“It’s about the pond,” said Jason gravely. “I go
there sometimes in the evening. When it’s misty you can
easily imagine an elf or a nymph floating on its surface.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is that all?” enquired Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not quite,” replied the other; “but you probably
won’t like the way it ends. It’ll seem funny to you; too
remote from your way of thinking; and it <span class='it'>is</span> rather
funny; but Lenty Pond is a funny place.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do go on,” said Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And once more in his delicately modulated voice the
poet began intoning:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>For the newts and the tadpoles at their play</p>
<p class='line0'>Laugh at the rain-elf’s tear-wet pillow;</p>
<p class='line0'>Laugh that her lover has fled away.</p>
<p class='line0'>Little care they for elf or willow.</p>
<p class='line0'>They flash their tails to a mocking cry—</p>
<p class='line0'>“Slow-Worm of Lenty, prophesy!”</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“That’s not the end, is it?” said Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man’s head turned slightly towards him; and the
one grey eye which was visible from where Wolf sat,
passed through some extraordinary change, as if a
glassy film separating the outward world from an inward
abyss of desolation had suddenly melted away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you want to hear the end?” said Jason Otter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf nodded, and the voice went on:</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>But never again can God look down</p>
<p class='line0'>As He did of old upon country and town!</p>
<p class='line0'>In His huge heart, hidden all Space beyond,</p>
<p class='line0'>There bides the curse of Lenty Pond;</p>
<p class='line0'>The curse of the Slow-Worm, by Lenty willow,</p>
<p class='line0'>Who pitied the elf on her tear-wet pillow,</p>
<p class='line0'>Her pillow woven of pond-weeds green</p>
<p class='line0'>Where the willow’s twigs made a leafy screen;</p>
<p class='line0'>And the purple loosestrife and watercress</p>
<p class='line0'>Whisper above her sorrowfulness.</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Once more the voice paused and Wolf listened to those
two persistent summer sounds, the tapping of the thrush’s
beak and the indescribable contentment of the wood-pigeon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is there any more?” he asked. “I like this style of
writing better than what you used to read to me a month
ago.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A person can’t do more than he can,” remarked Jason
Otter, while the flickering ghost of a smile came and
went at the corners of his mouth. It seemed that even this
indication of normal feeling was distasteful to him; for
he hurriedly raised his hand in order to conceal it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This movement of his arm made Wolf aware of the
scent of incense.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The chap’s clothes must be saturated with the stuff,”
he thought. “Oh, damn!” he thought again. “I <span class='it'>must</span> get
that idol away from him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“By the way, Otter,” he began, “while I think of it,
don’t forget what you promised on the fair-ground!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason turned his head away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’ll be out again presently,” he remarked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Whether this referred to the thrush that had just then
flown away, or to Dimity Stone, Wolf could not tell.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can give you two pounds of that five pounds straight
off,” he said, “if you’ll let me come in with you now and
put the thing in my pocket.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And the other three?” cried the man, rising to his
feet between the cucumber-frames and rubbing the back
of his trousers with his hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The other three next week,” said Wolf, thinking to
himself, “I don’t care what happens, as long as I dispose
of Mukalog.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on then, quick, before anyone sees!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They hurried into the house together; and no sooner
were they in the poet’s room than Wolf boldly snatched
at the little demon on the jade pedestal, and shoved it
unceremoniously into his side-pocket. Jason made a
queer, stiff, formal movement of his hand towards this
pocket; but when Wolf had thrown his arm roughly off,
an expression of something like relief rippled down over
his agitated countenance. His lips seemed to be muttering;
and Wolf fancied that they were explaining to the
object in the stranger’s pocket that its devotee had only
yielded to sheer force.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hurriedly Wolf put down two golden sovereigns on
the table. He refrained from placing them upon the
empty jade pedestal. He placed them side by side, close
to an edition of the works of Vaughan the Silurist.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And now,” he cried, “let’s hear the end of that Slow-Worm
poem!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not here, not here,” murmured the other, glancing, so
Wolf imagined, with lamentable anxiety at the empty
pedestal, as if at any moment seven other devils, worse
than Mukalog, might take possession of it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>No sooner were they safe back at the cucumber-frame
than Wolf resumed his request for the end of the Slow-Worm.
Leaning back with his hands clasped meekly in
front of him, like a child reciting a hymn, the astonishing
man obeyed him with docility.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>And the Lenty Slow-Worm curses God</p>
<p class='line0'>For the sake of the rain-elf’s pitifulness.</p>
<p class='line0'>He lifts his head from the watercress,</p>
<p class='line0'>He lifts his head from the quaker-grass,</p>
<p class='line0'>From the hoof-marks where the cattle pass,</p>
<p class='line0'>He lifts his head from the heavy sod,</p>
<p class='line0'>And under the loosestrife he curses God!</p>
<p class='line0'>And the newts and the tadpoles who where she lay</p>
<p class='line0'>Mocked her from bellies white, orange, and grey,</p>
<p class='line0'>Cry now to willow and water and weed,</p>
<p class='line0'>“Lenty Pond has a prophet indeed!”</p>
<p class='line0'>For the rain-elf weeps no more to her pillow</p>
<p class='line0'>Woven of twigs of the weeping-willow;</p>
<p class='line0'>But her lover, come back to the laughing rain-elf,</p>
<p class='line0'>Cries, “The Slow-Worm of Lenty is God Himself!”</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“Bravo!” cried Wolf. “Thank the Lord you managed
to comfort that poor girl!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She wasn’t a girl,” said Jason, colouring a little.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Eh? What’s that?” ejaculated the other. “How could
she have a lover then?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The poet was protected, however, from having to answer
this objection by a sudden, happily-timed interruption.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart, escorting Selena Gault, came shuffling
amiably towards them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Our two young friends in the kitchen-garden, ha?”
was the Squire’s greeting. “I’ve just been telling Miss
Gault, haven’t I, lady, how well you and I, Solent, get
on together as fellow authors. I never got on so well
with our poor dear Redfern, did I, Mr. Otter?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was aghast at the complicated significance of the
look that his employer fixed upon the agitated Jason.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your boots have got something nasty on them,” the
poet hurriedly rapped out to Miss Gault; and before the
lady could stop him, he was down on his knees on the
gravel, wiping one of her shoes with a handful of grass.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s only manure,” he said presently, rising with a
flushed face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Thank you, Mr. Otter, thank you very much,” said
Selena Gault. “I must have trodden on something.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope you found my mother in her best mood,” said
Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault frowned a little and then smiled on him
graciously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Thank you for helping us to renew our old acquaintance,
boy,” she said. “But it’s really Mr. Urquhart who
ought to be thanked by everybody for bringing you down
to us at all.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Thank Redfern, not me,” said the Squire, in his silkiest
tone. “It’s quite an art, isn’t it, Otter, this business
of leaving the world conveniently?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Jason was occupied in picking up the bits of
empty snail-shell left by the thrush.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do they do where there aren’t any stones to
break ’em on?” commented the Squire as he watched
him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault swept them both with her formidable gaze.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Throw those things away, Mr. Otter, please. When
the life’s gone that’s the end.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not always,” murmured the Squire. “Not always, ha?
What?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault lifted her eyebrows, and her distorted
upper-lip twitched. “For the dead, it’s the end,” she repeated
sternly; “but it’s better to be dead in death than
dead in life.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think I’d better go and see if my mother wants
me,” murmured Jason uneasily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll come with you, Otter,” said Mr. Urquhart, making
a deprecating little gesture with his hand, as if brushing
away Miss Gault’s indiscretion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he turned to Wolf. “Be in good time tomorrow,
Solent. I’ve got a book for you that’s more racy than
anything we’ve found yet. Malakite sent it over. The old
rogue knows exactly what suits us.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt it hard to believe the word “Malakite” was
something that he had heard many times before quite
calmly and casually. It teased his mind now that it
should even be uttered by this man, whose pendulous
cheek-folds seemed to him, as he looked at them, to resemble
the crumpled rattles of a rattlesnake.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Conversing sympathetically with Miss Gault, now, on
the harmless topic of Emma and the three cats, he led
the lady back into the front-garden.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Here he was presently much amused by observing Miss
Gault, with the graciousness of a ducal personage, offer
to drive Mrs. Solent as far as Lenty Cottage—an offer
that was promptly accepted. When both women were
gone, and Wolf himself had bidden his hostess good-night,
he was surprised to hear Jason offering to walk a
little way with him towards Blacksod.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf instinctively kept his hand in his side-pocket as
they walked, with an obstinate determination that nothing
should induce him to return Mukalog to his idolater.
But the poet’s thoughts seemed running in a quite different
direction.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s very difficult not to curse anyone,” Jason began,
hesitating, and reddening a little, “when a person expects
you to do it. But I’ve got the power of joining in,
so as not to annoy; while really I’m thinking just the
opposite!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>To himself Wolf explained this ambiguous remark by
assuming that Mr. Urquhart had been secretly propitiating
“the drunken individual at Pond Cottage” by disparaging
to him his new secretary.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the poet began again. “I don’t like the way some
people egg on that young fool Weevil to boast so grandly
of what lecherous things he’s done. When people encourage
an idiot like that, it’s bad for everybody. It puts
it into his head to play tricks he’d never dare to think
out for himself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ho! Ho!” thought Wolf. “What’s up now? Now
we’re beginning to learn something really curious!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And the poet continued, in an excited voice: “You
married people think you know everything. But no man
ever knows what these girls are after; and I doubt if
they know it themselves! It’s like a gadfly, that first
tickles them and then stings them.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s like a gadfly?” enquired Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The lust of your excellent young men, such as this
worthy Bob Weevil.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ah!” thought Wolf in his heart. “Now it’s coming!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I never myself talk of lechery to anyone,” went on
the poet; “but this Squire of yours enjoys his little jest,
whether it’s with a young man or a boy. I expect he’s a
bit afraid of you, Solent.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I should have supposed,” said Wolf, “that Mr. Urquhart
was too snobbish to treat a Blacksod tradesman
like an equal, whatever his age was!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There is only one class,” said the poet, with an air of
benign authority, “where these matters are concerned.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So you think Mr. Urquhart has been at work encouraging
our friend Weevil in some pretty little bit of
mischief, eh?” said Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A look of sheer pain came into Mr. Otter’s face.
“What put that into your head?” he cried. “I’ve not been
talking about anyone <span class='it'>you</span> know, or anyone <span class='it'>I</span> know. I’ve
been talking about the general mass of people. A person
is allowed to talk about <span class='it'>them</span>.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re afraid that Roger Monk might be hiding
behind that wall?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The poet turned toward him his sorrowful grey eyes.
“I don’t like to be upbraided,” he said gravely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m not upbraiding you,” protested Wolf. “Look!
There are none but very harmless people in there!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The wall by which they were now walking was indeed
the wall of the churchyard; and the idea of Death, like
a flying, sharded beetle, struck them simultaneously in
the face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think I’ll cancel our bargain, Solent,” said Jason
suddenly, “and give you back that money, and take back
my piece of jade!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a transformed countenance that the poet turned
now to his companion. Abysmal desolation had descended
upon him, and he almost whimpered as he implored
Wolf to return his idol.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s no use, man. I tell you it’s no use. If you went
straight down on your knees to me I wouldn’t give it
up!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason Otter pushed his hat back from his forehead
and stood for a moment with his eyes tight shut. Wolf,
who had no idea what thoughts were passing through
that heavy head, clutched tightly the handle of his
stick, thinking within himself: “He’s capable of anything.
He’s like a drug-addict, and I’ve got his drug in
my pocket!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>For a perceptible passage of time, though it may have
been no more than a few seconds, they remained thus
facing each other, while a group of King’s Barton children,
running with noisy shouts down the road, stopped
and stared at them open-mouthed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then Wolf was aware that the man’s lips, out of the
middle of that eyeless mask of misery, were muttering
something—something that sounded like an incantation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d better sheer off!” he thought; and as he tightened
his fingers round the handle of his stick, he overheard
one of the children who were looking on say to
another in a whisper: “It be only thik poor Mr. Otter,
took wi’ one o’ they fits, look-see! T’other gent be a-going
to hit he, present, long-side the ear-hole!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, good-night, Otter!” he called out to him. “If
you don’t mind I’ll shog on! I’ve got to walk fast now,
or Gerda will be worrying.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The figure in front of him made a blind step forward
like a somnambulist; and in a rapid mental vision as
definite as if it were a reality, Wolf saw him fallen
prone in the white dust, crying aloud for the return of
the image.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, good-night!” he repeated brusquely; and turning
on his heel, he strode off at a pace which it was not
easy to keep from becoming a run.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For some distance he had an uncomfortable sensation
in the back of his spine; but nothing happened. With his
left hand fiercely clutching the thing in his pocket, and
his right hand swinging his stick, he achieved an inglorious
but effective retreat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was not, however, till he was nearly a mile from
King’s Barton that he dared to reduce his speed and
take his mental bearings. Even then his disturbed fancy
mistook the faint thudding of some tethered animal’s
hooves on the floor of a shed for the patter of Jason’s
steps in pursuit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It must have been half-past six before he began to recover
himself and to look about him. There was hardly
a breath of wind stirring. There had fallen upon that
portion of the West Country one of those luminous late-summer
evenings, such as must have soothed the nerves
of Romans and Cymri, of Saxons and Northmen, after
wild pell-mells of advances and retreats, of alarums and
excursions, now as completely forgotten as the death-struggles
of mediæval hernshaws in the talons of
goshawks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The fields of wheat and barley, pearl-like and opalescent
in the swimming haze, sloped upwards to the high
treeless ridge along which ran the main road from Ramsgard
to Blacksod. On his left, lying dim and misty, yet
in some strange way lustrous with an inner light of their
own, as if all the earth had become one vast phosphorescent
glow-worm, rolled away from beneath that narrow
lane the dew-soaked pastures of the Blackmore Vale,
rising again in the distance to the uplands of High
Stoy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was tempted to rest for a while, so as to gather
into some kind of focus the confused impressions of that
crowded afternoon; but he found, when he paused for
a moment, leaning over a gate, that the dew-wet herbage
brought to his mind nothing but one persistent image,
an image calm and peaceful enough, but full of a most
perilous relaxation of heart and will and spirit—the
image, in fact, of a young man lying dead in a bedroom
at Pond Cottage, a young man with a shrouded face, and
long, thin legs. Who was it who had told him that young
Redfern was tall and thin?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved on, with a wave of his stick, as if to dispel
this phantom; and it was not long before the first houses
of Blacksod began to appear, some of them with windows
already displaying lamplight, which mingled
queerly enough with the strange luminosity such as still
emanated from earth and sky. Wolf noted how different
such spots of artificial light appeared, when they thus
remained mere specks of yellow colour surrounded by
pale greyness, from what they would be in a brief while,
when they broke up the complete darkness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And as he began to encounter the evening stir of the
town’s precincts, and the heavy breath of the Blackmore
pastures ceased to drug his senses, he found that what
he had gone through that day was now slowly sifting
itself out in the various layers of his consciousness.
“Either Urquhart <span class='it'>is</span> up to something,” he thought, “or
Jason has just invented the whole thing to satisfy his
own strange mind! God help us! What a crazy set they
all are! I’m thankful I’m out of it down here. Blacksod
doesn’t lend itself to such whimsies.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Thus did the outer surface of his mind report on the
situation, making use of the artificially acquired genial
optimism of many a forgotten mental <span class='it'>tour de force</span>.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But another—a deeper—layer in his mind made quite
a different report.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There’s something up, over there, that’s hostile to
me and to my life. They seem to have nothing else to
do, these King’s Barton people, but plot with one another
against someone. Good Lord! No wonder they
finished off Redfern among them all! I can see I’m going
to have to defend myself. And easily could I do it,
too, if it weren’t for mother. Damn! It’s mother being
up there that’s the rub; so dependent on Urquhart. If it
weren’t for her, I’d laugh at the whole lot of them. I’ve
got my job at the school, thanks to Darnley. What a man
Darnley is, compared with these madmen! They’ve worried
<span class='it'>him</span> a lot though. Anyone can see that.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This second layer of his consciousness seemed so
crowded with thoughts and surmises that he found himself
standing stock-still outside a little greengrocer’s
shop, the better to get things clear.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A small ornament, perched in the lighted window,
among the oranges and lettuces, made him recall the
idol in his pocket; and from Mukalog his mind rushed
back to Jason.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t understand him,” he said to himself. “Valley,
I know, is a good man. Urquhart is a demon. But Jason
baffles me. The Slow-Worm of Lenty! That’s about what
he is. I had a feeling just now, when he stood with his
eyes shut and his mouth gibbering, that he belonged to
some primeval order of things, existing before good and
evil appeared at all. But it’s clear that Urquhart’s cajoled
him somehow. And yet I don’t know! I’m tempted
to think he’d be a match even for him—very much in the
way some cold wet rain from the aboriginal chaos would
discomfort the Devil!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned from the shop-window and moved on. Soon
he came to where two crossroads branched off from the
one he followed, the road to the right leading up Babylon
Hill, the road to the left leading to that portion of
the town where Christie’s house was. Should he turn
to the left and return home that way? Or should he go
straight on, past his father-in-law’s yard?</p>

<p class='pindent'>The hesitation into which he now fell left an empty
space in his mind; and at once there rose to fill it, from
the invisible depths of his being, quite a new report upon
the events of that day. Was there something more than
those old sea-beach afternoons, those Lovers’ Lane
naughtinesses, between Gerda and Bob Weevil? He could
not help remembering the exciting photograph of the
girl astride of the tombstone which he had seen the two
lads enjoying so much, that day he bought the sausages
for Roger Monk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The more rational layers of Wolf’s consciousness now
began a derisive criticism of this new mood. Had he the
instincts of the lord of a seraglio? Did he demand that
both Gerda and Christie should be faithful to him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
while he himself was .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. as he was? No, it was different
from that! After his fashion he <span class='it'>was</span> being faithful
to Gerda. It was the nature of this particular case. It
was, in fact, Mr. Weevil! To be cuckolded by Bob, the
scamp of Blacksod, was not any way a very soothing
destiny; but to be cuckolded by Bob as a sort of schoolboy-lark,
a lark set in motion by the sardonic Mr. Urquhart,
was a fantastic outrage.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Still he hesitated at these crossroads, teased beyond
his wont by the difficulty of deciding which way to go.
He was so pulled at in both directions, that as he wavered
he seemed actually to see before him the objects he
would meet under either choice, and to feel the sensations
he would experience under either.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the end a motive simpler than love or jealousy decided
the point. He took the shorter way, the way by Mr.
Torp’s yard, because of a secret craving for food in the
recesses of his stomach. But though this was his real
motive, what he <span class='it'>thought</span> was his motive was jealousy
over Bob Weevil. And the idea of this, that he should
have such a feeling at all, in connection with the romance
of passing close to Christie’s room, at once puzzled and
shamed him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He walked on with rapid strides now; and as he passed
the familiar Torp yard, which lay in a hushed and rather
ghastly pool of twilight, he thought how little he had
foreseen, that March day when he turned into this enclosure,
what occurrences would be the result of it!
Bound by intimate habit to the one he had married—in
love, for good and all, with the one he had <span class='it'>not</span> married—his
situation just then was sufficiently complicated,
without all this bewildering turmoil of personalities in
King’s Barton!</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was with an accumulated measure of sheer animal
relief that he found himself entering his own house at
last. This was increased by a delicious abandonment to
unhindered amorousness when he discovered that Gerda
was waiting for him at the kitchen-stove in her nightdress
and dressing-gown. The girl had certain very
quaint and pretty ways of expressing her desire to be
made love to; and she had seldom been more excitable
or more whimsically provocative than she was that
night.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Though hunger had brought him so quickly home, it
was more than an hour after his return that they sat
down to their supper; and during the lingered-out and
shameless caresses which he enjoyed before he would
let her approach the stove, Wolf was compelled to come
to the conclusion that erotic delight has in itself the
power of becoming a kind of <span class='it'>absolute</span>. He felt as if it
became a sort of ultimate essence into which the merely
relative emotions of the two preoccupied ones sank—indeed
were so utterly lost that a new identity dominated
the field of their united consciousness, the admirable
identity of <span class='it'>amorousness in itself</span>, the actual spiritual
form, or “psychic being,” of the god Eros!</p>

<p class='pindent'>What Wolf found to his no small content was that
when this spiritual emanation of sweet delight had vanished
away he was entirely free from any feeling of having
committed sacrilege against his love for Christie.
Whether this would have been the case had Christie
been different from what she was, he found it difficult
to decide; though in the intervals of pleasant discourse
with Gerda, as they sat over their supper, he pondered
deeply upon that nice point.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Another side-issue that had a curious interest for him
was the question whether the accident of his having remembered
that wicked tombstone-picture on his way
home had had anything to do with the completeness of
his pleasure! He had noted before in himself the peculiar
rôle played by queer out-of-the-way imaginations
in all these things! And finally—but <span class='it'>this</span> thought did not
come to him till their meal was over—he caught himself
at least once that night in a grim wondering as to
how far the sweet desirability of his companion had been
enhanced for him by those sinister rumours of a rival
in the field, even though that rival was this water-rat-featured
seller of sausages!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda was the first to go to sleep that night as they
lay side by side, with the familiar odours of summer
grass and pigsty drainage floating in upon them. Wolf
had arrived, not without many mental adjustments, during
the last two months, at a more or less satisfactory
compromise between what he felt for this girl, thus lying
with his arm stretched out beneath her, and what
he felt for the other one. Christie’s inflexible pride and
the faint, hardly-stirred pulse of her subnormal senses,
made it much easier for him. An instinctive unwillingness,
too, in his own nature, to introduce any strain of
harsh idealism, led him to get all the contentment he
could out of his life with his lovely bedfellow. As he
listened to her evenly-drawn breathing, and felt, through
all his nerves, the delicious relaxation of her love-exhausted
limbs, he was conscious now more than ever
that it was completely unthinkable that he should be
guilty of making her unhappy by any drastic change.
In a sense what he had said to Selena Gault was true.
He <span class='it'>was</span> happy. But he knew in his heart perfectly well
that he was only happy because the deepest emotion he
was capable of was satisfied by his nearness to Christie.
Profoundly self-conscious as he was, Wolf was never
oblivious of his lack of what people have agreed to call
by the name of “passion.” Luckily enough Christie, too,
seemed, as far as he was able to tell, devoid of this
exigency; so that by their resemblance in this peculiarity
the strange intensity of their love was not disturbed
by his easy dalliance with Gerda.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What Wolf at this moment felt, as he listened to the
girl’s soft breathing and held her in his arms, was a
delicious, diffused tenderness—a tenderness which, like
the earth itself, with the cool night-airs blowing over
it, was touched by rumours and intimations belonging
to another region. His sensual nature tranquillized, satisfied,
appeased, permitted his spirit to wander off freely
towards that other girlish form, more elusive, less tangible,
hardly realizable to any concrete imagination,
which now lay—sleeping or waking, he knew not which—in
the room that looked out upon Poll’s Camp! There,
above the books of that incestuous old man’s shop, that
other one was lying alone. Was <span class='it'>she</span> satisfied in this ambiguous
love of his? He preferred not to let himself
dwell upon that aspect of the matter just then; and
holding Gerda fast, and inhaling the mingled night-airs,
he let his mind sink into the plenary absolution of
a deep, dreamless sleep.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap13'>HOME FOR BASTARDS</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>The next day proved to be, as far as the weather
was concerned, even more pleasant than its predecessor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Event followed event in harmonious and easy sequence.
Gerda’s morning crossness was tempered by an enchanting
aftermath of petulant willingness to be caressed.
His boys at the Grammar School, whom he had laboriously
anchored in the reign of the first Tudor, were too
occupied with thoughts of examinations and the approaching
summer holidays to be as troublesome as
usual. His afternoon at King’s Barton was devoted to
a concentrated perusal of the history of the unfortunate
Lady Wyke of Abbotsbury; and Mr. Urquhart, crouching
at his elbow like a great silky Angora tom-cat, was
too absorbed in their researches to indulge in more than
a very few of his sidelong malignities.</p>

<p class='pindent'>So well-pleased with their progress was the Squire,
that while he and his secretary drank their tea at the
library-window he asked Wolf if it would be any help
to his mother if Roger Monk were to drive her to Ramsgard
and back before dinner.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Roger declares he wants to go over there,” he said.
“What he’s up to I don’t know. He never tells me anything.
But if your mother or you care for the drive,
you can tell him to call for you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf knew that Mrs. Solent had in her mind the
notion of paying a formal call upon Miss Gault as a
sign of their reconciliation; so he hurriedly accepted
this offer and went off at once.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think I’ll go too,” he announced to the big darkbrowed
servant; “so, if it won’t weigh down your gig,
you might put in the back-seat for me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found his mother lingering over her tea in the
parlour of the trim cottage. He caught a glimpse of her
unobserved as he approached the window, and it was
rather a shock to him to observe a look in her face
which he had never seen before. She was sitting motionless,
with her outstretched hands pressed against the
edge of the table and her gaze fixed upon emptiness.
Her brown eyes, from the angle at which he caught her,
had a defeated, weary, helpless expression, and even the
contours of her formidable chin were relaxed, crumpled,
desolate.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had a queer feeling of shame for having caught
her thus, as though in the indecent exposure of some
secret deformity; and he hurriedly and noisily entered
the little house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At his appearance her whole manner changed. She
seemed delighted to have the chance of driving to Ramsgard
with him, and they chatted gaily till she went upstairs
to get ready.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Roger Monk did not keep them waiting; and while he
was at the garden-gate, holding the horse till the lady
came down, Wolf had a word or two with him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Urquhart didn’t seem to know what you were
up to in Ramsgard,” he remarked, indiscreetly enough,
but with no ulterior motive.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He knew right and fine, Mr. Solent! Don’t you make
no mistake. There isn’t much that goes on up at House—or
out of House either, for that matter—that <span class='it'>he</span> doesn’t
know!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That must be rather uncomfortable sometimes, eh?
What?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This rather ungentlemanly imitation of the Squire’s
favourite phrase tickled the swarthy giant’s fancy, and
he smiled broadly. But a minute later his face grew
grave and worried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tis a good place with Squire,” he whispered, bending
down towards Wolf. “But I tell ’ee straight, Mr.
Solent, Sir, if I knew for sure he wouldn’t play some
dog’s trick on me I’d do a bunk tomorrow!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf stared at him blankly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I would,” he repeated. And then, with the scowl of
a righteous executioner, “I’ll tap the top of his black
head for him one of these days if God Almighty doesn’t
do it first!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In spite of this somewhat ominous beginning, their
drive into Ramsgard was a great success. Roger Monk
quickly recovered his good-humour under Mrs. Solent’s
blandishments; and by the time they reached the schoolgate
they were all three in the best of spirits.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Here they separated, the servant driving Mrs. Solent
towards Miss Gault’s house, while Wolf turned up the
street with the intention of paying a visit to the Smiths.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The door was opened for him by Mattie herself; and
the brother and sister embraced affectionately, as soon
as they were alone in the cool, dark, musty hall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dad is out,” she whispered, “and we’ve only one
servant now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“One servant?” he echoed, as she led him, with her
finger on her lip, into the empty dining-room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Olwen’s upstairs playing,” she said in a low voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was clear to him that she was anxious that the
child should not hear his voice; so he shut the door very
quietly and they sat down together on two red leather
chairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s the trouble, Mattie dear?” he murmured,
holding her hand tightly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s Dad,” she said. “He’s been queer the last few
days.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was difficult for Wolf to repress a smile; for the
idea of Mr. Albert Smith, the great Hatter of Ramsgard
School, the sedate Churchwarden of the Abbey, being
in any kind of way “queer” struck him as grotesque.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s up with him? Business bad?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie sighed, and, releasing her hand from his clasp,
folded her fingers tightly together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s worse than bad,” she said slowly. “Do you know,
Wolf, I believe Dad’s ruined.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good Lord, child!” he cried. “He can’t be! I can’t
believe it. Mr. Smith? Why, he’s been at this job
here for as long as I can remember. He must have
made a lot! He may have got some mania, my dear,
about money. You ought to make him sell out and retire!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I tell you, Wolf,” she said emphatically, and with
a certain irritation, “it’s true! Can’t you believe I know
what I’m talking about? He’s been investing in some
silly way. He’s never been as sensible as people think;
and now he’s hit, knocked over. I believe he’s already
taken the first step, whatever that is, to being bankrupt.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Bankrupt?” repeated Wolf helplessly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So that’s the state of <span class='it'>our</span> affairs!” she cried in a
lighter tone. “And now tell me about yourself and your
pretty Gerda.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As she spoke she rose to her feet and flung her hands
behind her head, straightening her frame to its full
height.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s got a fine figure,” thought Wolf. “What a
shame that her nose is so large!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie’s countenance did indeed seem, as he looked at
her staring steadily down at him out of her deep-set
grey eyes, even less presentable than when he had seen
her a few weeks ago.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s been having a bad time, poor girl!” he thought.
“How damnable that the gods didn’t mould her face
just a little more carefully!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked at her as she fixed her eyes on the floor,
frowning; and then he glanced away at the mahogany
sideboard, where Mr. Smith’s heavy pieces of polished
silver met his gaze, with the peculiar detached phlegm
of old, worn possessions that have seen so many family-troubles
that they have grown professionally callous,
after the manner of undertakers and sextons.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Something about that silver on the sideboard, combined
with his sister’s news, threw a grey shadow over
his own life. His mind sank down into a desolate acceptance
of long years of stark endurance, the sort of endurance
that wind-blown trees have to acquire when
their branches become at last permanently bent, from
bowing sideways, away from the north or the east.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, now you know the worst!” his sister murmured
at last.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It might be worse still,” he said lamely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her eyes unexpectedly flashed and she gave vent to a
queer little laugh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t care! I don’t care! I don’t care!” she cried.
“In fact, if it weren’t for Olwen, I believe I’d be almost
glad!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf screwed up his eyes and regarded her closely.
He suddenly became aware that this daughter of his father
had something in her nature that he understood well
enough.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Listen, Mattie,” he said quietly. “I have an idea that
things are going to work out all right—work out better
for you, in fact, than they’ve been doing for a long
time.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She looked straight into his face and smiled, while
one of her eyebrows rose humorously and twitched a little.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You and I are a funny pair, Wolf,” she said. “I
believe we actually <span class='it'>like</span> to be driven and hunted.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They exchanged a long, confused look. Then he protruded
his under-lip and drew down the corners of his
mouth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If so, we know where we get it,” he said. And then,
in a sudden after-thought: “Look here, we must slip
off one day together and visit his grave. I don’t see
why Madame Selena should have a monopoly of that
spot!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She made a somewhat brusque and ungracious movement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t like graves,” she said. “But come on, Wolf,
we mustn’t stay down here any more. Let’s go up and
see Olwen. She’ll never forgive me even now for keeping
you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He opened the door for her and they went up softly
together. As he followed her form up the dim staircase,
the thought came shamelessly into his head that
had she been as lovely in face as she was flexible in
figure she would have had a sensual attraction for him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But I understand her well,” he said to himself. “And
I’ll do what I can to make her life happier.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie paused, when she reached the first landing, till
he was at her side. Then she called out: “Olwen! Olwen!
Here’s a visitor for you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Olwen! Olwen!” echoed Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a scream and a scramble, and a door was
flung wide. The little girl ran out with her hair flying
and rushed into her friend’s arms.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When at last he disentangled himself from her clinging
hands, he held her at a distance from him, pushing
her into the stream of light that had come with her
through the open door. Holding her in this way he
searched her face with a stern scrutiny. “After all,” he
thought, “she’s more nearly related to Christie than I
am to Mattie. We might all be in Mr. Urquhart’s book!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the child pulled him into her room, and, disregarding
Mattie completely, began hurriedly displaying
before him every one of her treasures.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The summer night was already chilly, and over the
half-opened window the muslin curtains swelled and receded,
receded and swelled, as if they were sails on an
invisible sea. Crouching upon a low straight-backed
nursery-chair—the very chair, in fact, upon which her
mother had sat to suckle her in her infancy—Mattie sat
with her hands clasped round her knees, watching the
shadows of their three forms, thrown by the candlelight,
waver and hover against the old-fashioned wall-paper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf began to detach himself, as the three of them sat
there, from the pressure of the actual situation, from
the awareness even of his own personality. He seemed to
slip away, out of his human skin, out of that old Ramsgard
house, out of the very confines of life itself. He had
the sensation that he was outside life—that he was outside
death too; that he was floating in some airy region,
where forms and shapes and sounds had been left behind—had
changed into <span class='it'>something else</span>.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Attenuated by the influence of these bodiless fancies,
the palpable shapes of Mattie and Olwen seemed to thin
themselves out into something more filmy than the stuff
of dreams. Mechanically he responded to Olwen’s intense
preoccupations, mechanically he smiled at his sister
across the little girl’s flushed face. But he felt that
his senses were no longer available, no longer to be
trusted. He had slid away somehow into some level of
existence where human vision and human contact meant
nothing at all. It was as if these two girls had become
as unreal as his own intangible thoughts—those thoughts
like tiny twilight insects—which passed without leaving
a trace!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No! Didn’t you hear me telling you? That’s not
Gipsy .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that’s Antoinette!” scolded the little girl, as
she snatched a miniature pillow from under one waxen
head to insert it violently beneath another.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dolls—dolls—dolls!” thought Wolf. “If we can slip
out of reality, why can’t they slip into it?” He began
automatically swinging both Gipsy and Antoinette from
one hand to the other, a proceeding which delighted their
little mistress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What,” he thought, as he contemplated Mattie’s heavy,
clouded, patient features, her corrugated brow, her thick
nose, “what am I aiming at, meddling with these people’s
lives? I do it with the same voracity with which I
eat honey or trample over grass. I’m driven to it as if
I were an omophagous demon! Is this the sort of thing
my father did—that scoundrel with his ‘happy life’?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was interrupted in his thoughts by the sound of
a bell downstairs, followed by the opening of a door and
by unsteady steps in the hall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie jumped to her feet and stood listening, intent
and anxious.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I believe that’s Father!” she cried. “But why did he
ring? He never rings. Excuse me, Wolf, I must run
down.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She opened the door, but remained still listening, as
also did Olwen, with wide-open startled eyes, a thin
arm thrown round Wolf’s neck.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a muttering and a shuffling downstairs, followed
by the clang of a heavy stick falling on a tiled
floor. Then a chair creaked ominously and there was a
sort of groan. Then all was silent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie, with her hand on the door, turned round to
them; and in spite of the flickering of the candles he
could see that her face had gone white.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s Father!” she whispered. “He’s ill. I <span class='it'>must</span> go
down.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Still hesitating, however, and evidently struck by
some sort of panic, she continued to waver in the doorway.
Wolf remembered afterwards every smallest incident
of that occasion. Olwen’s little arm had a pulse
in it that beat against his cheek like a tiny clock as she
held him tighter and tighter. He replaced Gipsy and
Antoinette on a chair by his side, half-consciously
smoothing down their ruffled dresses. Both dolls’ eyes,
one pair blue and one black, stared up at him. Antoinette’s
arm stuck out awkwardly, absurdly. He pushed
it down by her side with one of his fingers and it creaked
as he did so.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stay where you are, both of you! I must go!” cried
Mattie; and she ran hastily down the stairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then there was a sudden scream that echoed sharply
through the whole silent house. “Wolf! Wolf!” came
her voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stay here, sweetheart!” he cried, freeing himself and
rushing to the door. “Stay where you are!” But the little
girl followed him like a shadow and was there by his
side when he reached the hall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They had left the door of the dining-room open, and
by the light thus flung into the passage he saw Mattie on
her knees before one of the hall-chairs, on which sprawled
the stiff, collapsed form of Mr. Smith. His eyes were open
and conscious under his black felt hat, which, tilted
sideways, gave him a grotesque, drunken appearance.
Mattie was chafing his hands with her own and murmuring
wild endearments.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf hurriedly closed the front-door, which had been
left ajar, and then, with Olwen still clinging to him,
proceeded to strike a match, so as to light the hall-lamp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What are you doing, Wolf? Go away, Olwen. He’ll
be better in a minute. Father! Darling Father, what’s
the matter? What is it, Father? You’re safe at home.
You’re all right now. Father dearest, what is it?” Mattie
kept crying out in this way all manner of contradictory
commands and appeals, as she went on rubbing Mr.
Smith’s impassive hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf removed the man’s hat and hung it carefully on
a peg. He remembered afterwards the look of this hat,
hanging side by side with his own, calm and a little
supercilious, as hats in that position always are.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mattie,” he said, “do you want me to go and find a
doctor?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But at the word “doctor” the man in the chair found
his voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No—no—no! No doctor. I won’t have one. I won’t!
Off! Off! Off!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What is it, Father dear?” cried Mattie, rising to her
feet and pressing her hand against his forehead. “No,
you don’t want a doctor. I’m here—your Mattie. You’re
better now, Father, aren’t you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Smith stared at her with a heavy confused stare.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All thieves,” he muttered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf tried to catch his sister’s eye for permission to
disobey the sick man, but the girl seemed to have forgotten
his existence. It was clear to him that Mr. Smith
had had some kind of stroke. His face wore now an unnatural
reddish tint, and his head kept drooping sideways,
as if the muscles of his neck no longer responded
to his will.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly he astonished them by calling out “Lorna!
Lorna!” in a loud voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, he’s dying!” sobbed Mattie. “That’s Mother he
wants. It’s your Mattie. It’s your dear Mattie,” she repeated,
bending over him. But Mr. Smith had begun
mumbling now, incoherently, but not inarticulately.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Home .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. home for bastards.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” Wolf was sure
those were the words he used; and he was relieved that
Mattie, fallen on her knees again now, was sobbing so
violently as to make it unlikely that she could catch what
he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hats .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hats for bastards.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” Mr. Smith went
on. “No, no, Lorna! It was to Longburton he took you.
But never mind.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Albert Smith, home for bastards.
Albert Smith, Ramsgard, Dorset, Draper and Hat-Dealer.
To the school, I tell ’ee! No—no—no! She’ll never,
never, never confess.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Longburton barn .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hay
and straw .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hay and straw in your hair, my dear .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
and long past eleven.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What? You pricked your finger?
A very pretty hat! Hats for bastards.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Home.
<span class='it'>My</span> home. Albert Smith of Ramsgard come home.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His head had sunk so low now as to be almost resting
on Mattie’s shoulder, as she sobbed against his knees.
Suddenly he lifted it with a spasmodic jerk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll pay for the child! I’ve got the money. I’ll pay
for them all and say nothing. Albert Smith, Draper and
Hatter.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. To the school, I tell ’ee! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Pay .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
pay all .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. pay.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was really the end now. His body fell forward
over the stooping girl, and Wolf was hard put to it to
pull her away from between the prone forehead and the
stiff, protruding knees. For the moment he feared she
would collapse; but he saw the quick, protective glance
she cast at Olwen, who stood motionless, staring at the
dead man like a fairy in a pantomime at the chief clown,
and he knew then that she was mistress of herself. She
helped him, without shrinking and without any more
tears, to carry the body of Mr. Smith up the staircase
and into his bedroom.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was about two hours after this that Wolf entered
the room again with Mattie. Here, lying on his own high
pillow, the head of the dead man had already assumed
an expression of exhausted indifference. Close by his
side, on a little table by the bed, as Wolf cast a final
glance at him, was a picture of a young woman in the
chaste costume of the mid-Victorian epoch. “Madam
Lorna, I suppose,” he thought; and he would have
looked more closely at his father’s sweetheart, but the
presence of Mattie restrained him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll come over tomorrow evening, my dear,” he said,
“after my work with the Squire. Don’t commit yourself
to any arrangements or any plans till we’ve seen how the
land lies. You won’t, will you, Mattie?” he repeated emphatically.
“I’ll be really angry if you make any move
that we haven’t discussed together.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were out on the landing by this time, and the
little girl heard them speaking and called out to them
from her room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go to sleep, Olwen!” cried Mattie.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I want him to see Gipsy and Antoinette! I want him
to see them!” the child repeated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Only for a minute, Wolf, <span class='it'>please</span>!” whispered his
sister. “She’s so terribly excited I shall never get her to
sleep.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They opened the door and went in. There was a tray,
with milk and biscuits upon it, on the chest of drawers
by Olwen’s bed and near the tray a small night-light
burning. By this faint flicker Wolf could see the little
girl’s dark eyes shining with awe-struck intensity, though
she was immobile as an image.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come nearer! Come quite near! They’re as awake
as I am.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He went up to the bed; and there, lying on opposite
sides of Olwen’s pillow, were the two dolls, with black
ribbons twisted tightly round them and their hair brushed
smooth and straight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They are going to grandfather’s funeral tomorrow,”
she whispered. “Don’t they look sorry and good?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A minute or two later he bade his sister farewell at the
front-door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re sure you don’t want me to stay the night with
you?” he asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie shook her head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I shall sleep with Olwen,” she replied quietly. “We
shall be all right.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, remember you’ve had no supper. You’ll never
get through the night if you don’t eat something.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What about you, Wolf? How stupid I am!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I’ll get a drink at the Lovelace on my way,” he
said. “But remember—no plans of any kind till I’ve
seen you again!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was indeed only just in time to get into the Lovelace
bar before the Abbey clock struck ten. He enquired
about the King’s Barton coachman and found that Mrs.
Solent had left a message at the hotel-office earlier in the
evening, saying that they could not wait for him, but
that they had heard of Mr. Smith’s death and would Mr.
Solent come and see her tomorrow.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wonder,” he thought, “how the devil she heard?
They must have actually come to the door and been told
by the maid about it when we were all upstairs. Well,
it’ll give her some kind of a shock, I daresay—but not
very much!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He left the Lovelace after drinking a pint of Dorchester
ale. The night was cool and fragrant. The sky
was covered now by a grey film of feathery clouds,
through which neither moon nor stars were visible except
as a faint diffused luminosity, which lifted the
weight of darkness from the earth, but turned the world
into a place of phantoms and shadows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf decided to follow the shorter and easier way
home. This was the highroad to Blacksod that ran along
the top of the ridge dividing Dorset from Somerset; and
as he strode between the phantasmal wheat-fields of that
exposed upland, his thoughts took many a queer turn.
So Mattie and Olwen were left penniless! That was evidently
going to be the upshot of the hatter’s death. And
the question was, what was to become of them? If it had
not been for the child’s insane hostility to Christie, the
natural course would have been for Olwen to return to
her father’s dwelling. The chances were that the local
authorities, unless Miss Gault took upon herself to meddle
again, would not interfere. Then his mind reverted
to his mother.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Would his mother take them in? Roger Monk’s house
was certainly big enough, and it seemed unlikely that
the Squire would object if no one else did. But—good
Lord!—he couldn’t visualize his mother living with another
woman, or indeed putting up with the waywardness
and excitability of Olwen. Who would educate her? It
was impossible to contemplate Olwen at school!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The problem seemed well-nigh insoluble, as he pondered
on it. Then, all in a moment, he thought of Selena
Gault. There, no doubt, was the obvious solution!
Selena was passionately fond of the little girl, and Selena
had a servant. He stared at a fantastic thorn-tree,
whose largest branch, bare of leaves and apparently quite
dead, stretched out a semi-human hand across the tangled
foliage of the roadside. As was his wont when confronted
by a mental dilemma, he stood stock-still and
regarded this silent monitor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Nature was always prolific of signs and omens to
his mind; and it had become a custom with him to keep
a region of his intelligence alert and passive for a thousand
whispers, hints, obscure intimations that came to
him in this way. Why was it that a deep, obstinate resistance
somewhere in his consciousness opposed itself
to such a solution? He tried to analyze what he felt.
Selena was a good woman, a passionately protective
woman; but there it was! That interference in the case of
the Malakites had lodged a deep distaste in his mind.
She might love Olwen; but she probably hated Mattie as
much as she did Christie.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Damn! Why had Mr. Smith fooled away his money
and shuffled himself off in this awkward manner? “Home
for bastards”—what gross outbursting of the literal
truth that was! Well, it was <span class='it'>his</span> business now to take the
hatter’s place and find just such a home! That incorrigibly
complacent and grinning skull in the cemetery had
certainly managed to bequeath burdens to its legitimate
offspring which were not easy to fulfill!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf stuck out his under-lip at the oracular thorn-tree
and strode on. What he asked now, of that grey
luminosity above him and of those diaphanous wraith-like
corn-shocks, was why there should be, between his
deepest desire and his complicated activity, such an unbridged
gulf?</p>

<p class='pindent'><span class='it'>He had only one life.</span> That was a basic and relentless
fact. An eternity of “something or other” lay behind
him, and an equally obscure eternity of “something or
other” lay in front of him. Meanwhile, here he was,
with only one single, simple, and world-deep craving—the
craving to spend his days and his nights with that
other mysterious and mortal consciousness, entitled Christie
Malakite! And yet, for reasons comparatively superficial,
reasons comparatively external to his secret life-current,
he was steadily, day by day, month by month,
building up barriers between himself and Christie, struggling
to build them up, moving men and women like
bricks and mortar to build them up!</p>

<p class='pindent'>A villainously evil thought assailed him as he walked
along. Were all his better actions only so many Pharisaic
sops thrown one by one into the mouth of a Cerberus of
selfishness, monstrous and insane? Was his “mythology”
itself only a projection of such selfishness? He carried
this sardonic thought like a demon-fox pressed against
the pit of his stomach, for nearly a mile; and it was just
as if the hard, opaque crystal-circle of his inmost identity
were, under that fox’s black saliva, turning into
something shapeless and nauseating, something that resembled
a mass of floating frog-spawn.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come, you demon,” he said to himself at last, “my
soul is going to remain intact, or it’s going to dissolve
into air!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had reached the summit of Babylon Hill now; and
precisely where he had first crossed that stile with Gerda,
he stood at this moment, rending his nature in a desperate
inward struggle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When, in the middle of the night, lying in his bed by
Gerda’s side, he recalled this evil experience, he found
the explanation of it in a sort of dissolution-hypnosis, or
corruption-sympathy, linking him with the actual dead
body of Albert Smith!</p>

<p class='pindent'>What he experienced was strange enough. He found
himself very soon clutching with his fingers one of the
posts of that stile, while with his other hand he dug his
stick savagely into the sun-baked earth. And it seemed to
him that every revolting or secretive instinct he had ever
had took on a material shape and became as an actual
portion of his physical body.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He became, in fact, a living human head, emerging
from a monstrous agglomeration of all repulsiveness.
And this gross mass was not only foul and excremental;
it was in some mysterious way <span class='it'>comic</span>. He, the head of this
unspeakable body, was the joke of the abyss; the smug
charlatan-prig at which the devils shrieked with laughter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The queer thing was that his brain moved at this moment
with incredible rapidity. His brain debated, for
example, as it had never done before, the insoluble problem
of free-will, the problem of the very existence of the
mystery called “will.” And then, all in a moment, with
a crouching-wild-animal movement of his consciousness,
he flung a savage defiance to all these doubts. He laid
hold of his will as if it had been a lightning-conductor,
and, shaking it clear of his body, thrust it forth into
space, into a space that was below and yet above, within
and yet beyond Poll’s Camp and Babylon Hill. And then,
in a second, in less than a second, so it seemed, as he
recalled it afterwards, there came flowing in upon him,
out of those secret depths of which he was always more
or less conscious, a greater flood of liberating peace than
he had ever known before!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had the sensation, as he came down the slope, of
having left behind, on the top of Babylon Hill, some
actual physical body—a body that had been troubling
him, like a great repulsive protuberance, both by its
appearance and by its weight. He felt lighter, freer, liberated
from the malice of matter. Above all he felt once
more that his inmost identity was a hard, round, opaque
crystal, which had the power of forcing itself through
any substance, organic, inorganic, magnetic, or psychic,
that might obstruct its way.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There were a few lights twinkling still among the
Blacksod roofs. But he had no notion whether Christie’s
was among them; and at this moment it seemed unimportant.
A new fragrance filled the air as he descended;
which he defined to himself as the actual smell of Somersetshire,
as distinct from the smell of Dorsetshire—the
far-off fragrance, in fact, full of the exhalations of brackish
mosses, amber-coloured peat-tussocks, and arrow-pointed
water-plants, of the salt-marshes of Sedgemoor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once in the town, he took without any hesitation—though
he did not forget that long vigil of the night in
June—the particular way that led past the Torp monument-yard.
As he approached Preston Lane through the
deserted streets, he found himself thinking shamelessly
and contentedly of the pleasure of making love to Gerda
before he went to sleep.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind, after the experience he had gone through,
seemed to float lightly and carelessly over every aspect
of his existence. The personality of Christie remained
the same through everything. It was as if to everything
he did, even to making love to Gerda, Christie set her
proud and careless seal. This indeed—so he said to
himself—was the solution of that dilemma on which he
had been impaled. Christie did remain the great aim and
purpose of his life; but these innumerable other people
were part of the body of that life itself. They were what
<span class='it'>he was</span>, his ways, his habits, his customs, his manias, his
impulses, his instincts; and <span class='it'>with all that he was</span> he had
now been drawn to Christie as if by a magnet strong
enough to move a great slave-galleon of manias and superstitions,
<span class='it'>en masse</span> across the deep!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Airy and light as it now was, his soul seemed to have
been liberated in some secret way from all that clogged
and burdened it. The slave-galleon of his manias rocked
and tossed on a smooth tide; but his soul, like a careless
albatross, rode on the masthead. There was a strange
humming and singing from the galleon itself, as if the
immense peace of that summer night had turned it into a
trireme of deliverance, carrying liberated pilgrims to
the harbour where they would be. Something unutterable,
some clue, some signal, had touched the dark bulkheads
of this night-voyager; so that hereafter all might
be different. What was this clue? All he knew about it
now was that it meant the <span class='it'>acceptance</span> of something monstrously
comic in his inmost being, something comic and
stupid, together with something as grotesquely non-human
as the sensations of an ichthyosaurus! But once
having accepted all this, everything was magically well.
“Christie! Christie!” he cried in his heart, longing to
tell her about it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stopped when he was opposite the familiar pigsty,
and lifted his head, breathing deeply. At that moment
Fate seemed so kind to him that its kindness was almost
too great. His love for Christie seemed to touch with a
kind of transparency everything that he looked at. Rapidly
he crossed the road, entered his house, and ran upstairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found the room dark; but when he had lit a
candle he saw that the girl was lying wide-awake, her
head propped high on the two pillows. He was in such an
exalted mood that he was hardly surprised at her first
words.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, Wolf, Wolf,” she said, “I’m almost sorry you’ve
come so soon. I’ve been looking through that window for
hours and hours. What’s happened to me I don’t know;
but I’ve not felt like this since that evening when you
first loved me in the river-fields.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stooped and kissed her without attempting an
answer; and when he held her presently in his arms, and
the room was again dark, it was as if they each found an
opportunity in their embraces wherein to express an accumulated
tide of feelings that spread out wide and far—spread
out beyond all that he could feel for her, and
beyond—so it seemed to him, as he tasted tears on her
cheek—all that she could feel for him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And now, as their dalliance sank into quiescence, one
of Wolf’s final thoughts before he slept was of the vast
tracts of unknown country that every human consciousness
includes in its scope. Here, to the superficial eye,
were two skulls, lying side by side; but, in reality, here
were two far-extending continents, each with its own sky,
its own land and water, its own strange-blowing winds.
And it was only because his own soul had been, so to
speak, washed clean of its body that day, that he was
able to feel as he felt at this moment. But—even so—what
those thoughts of hers had been, that he had interrupted
by his return, he knew no better now, than when first he
had entered her room and had blown out her candle.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap14'>CROOKED SMOKE</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>It was with a fairly untroubled mind that Wolf
set off the following afternoon for King’s Barton. And
it was with a peculiar sense of recovery that he found
himself seated side by side with Mr. Urquhart at the littered
table in the great library-window.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Incredibly fragrant were the garden-scents that flowed
in upon him, past the Squire’s pendulous eye-folds,
Napoleonic paunch, and withered pantaloon-legs. The
old rogue had discovered a completely new stratum of
obscene Dorset legends. He had got on the track now of
accounting for certain local cases of misbehaviour, on
the grounds of libidinous customs reverting to very
remote times. He was, in fact, at this moment gathering
all the material he could find about the famous “Cerne
Giant,” whose phallic shamelessness seemed by no means
confined to its harmless representation upon a chalkhill.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he looked down, past Mr. Urquhart’s profile, upon
the lawn below, and contemplated the rich mingling
of asters, lobelias, and salpiglossis in Roger Monk’s favourite
flower-bed, it seemed to Wolf that certain prematurely
fallen leaves which he caught sight of down
there upon the grass had struck his consciousness long
ago with a tremendous significance. Those sultry glowing
purples .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. those dead leaves .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what <span class='it'>was</span> that significance?
“This day is going to be a queer day for me,”
he thought. For he had become aware that some screen,
some casement, at the back of his mind, behind which
his most secret impressions lived and moved in their
twilight, had swung open a little.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He kept staring down out of that library-window past
his employer’s profile. That purple glow from the flower-bed
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. those dead leaves .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. why was there no dew
down there? It was autumn dew he was thinking about
that August day .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. silvery mist upon purple flowers.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “The most important things in my life,” he said to
himself, “are what come back to me from forgotten
walks, when I’ve been alone.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Dark grass with purplish
flowers .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. dead leaves with dew on them.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
I wonder,” he thought, “how much room those undertakers
left between old Smith’s face and his coffin-lid?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then he thought, “I wonder if old Smith ever noticed
the look of dew upon dead leaves?” and he shifted
his position a little, as a cold shiver went through him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mr. Urquhart now broke silence. Some telepathic
wave must have passed from his secretary’s wandering
mind into his own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s this news I hear,” he said, “about Albert
Smith? The old chap’s kicked the bucket, eh? Lovelace
was over here this morning, and he tells me the fellow
died last night and left nothing but debts. A bad lookout
for those two girls, what? Lovelace even hints at suicide.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Squire paused, and a very curious expression came
into his face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They talked of suicide when Redfern died,” he went
on. “I’d like to know what <span class='it'>you</span> think, Solent, about this
business of shuffling off without a word to anyone? D’ye
think it’s easy for ’em? D’ye think they do it with their
brains cool and clear? D’ye think they have some pretty
awful moments or not, ha? Come, tell me, tell me! I hate
not to know these things. Do they go through the devil
of a time before they bring themselves to it, eh? Or do
they sneak off like constipated beagles, to eat the long
ditch-grass and ha’ done with it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf tried in vain to catch his employer’s equivocal
eye as he listened to all this. Never in his acquaintance
with Mr. Urquhart had he felt so baffled by the drift of
the man’s mind. Something in himself, rising up from
very hidden depths, gave him a hurried danger-signal;
but what possible danger there could be to him from
the man’s words he was unable to see.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do they mind it or don’t they?” repeated the Squire.
“People pity ’em; but what does anyone know? Perhaps
the only completely happy moments of a man’s
life are when he’s decided on it. Things must look different
then—different and much nicer, eh, Solent? But
different, anyway; very different. Don’t ’ee think so,
Solent? Quite different.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Little things, I mean.
Things like the handles of doors, and bits of soap in
soap-dishes, and sponges on washing-stands! Wouldn’t
you want to squeeze out your sponge, Solent, and pick
up the matches off the floor, when you’d decided on it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was spared the necessity of any retort to this
by the appearance of Roger Monk. The man came in
without knocking and walked straight up to their table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf peered at him with quizzical screwed-up eyes.
He couldn’t help recalling that explosion of homicidal
hatred which he had listened to outside Lenty Cottage.
But the gardener’s countenance was impassive now as a
human-faced rock.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Eh? What’s that, Monk? Speak up. Mr. Solent will
not mind.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Weevil and young Torp, Sir, round at the back, Sir;
asking for leave to fish in Lenty Pond, Sir.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Monk uttered the words in a low, discreet, colourless
voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart at once assumed a blustering great man’s
tone of genial condescension, as if he were addressing
himself to the youths in question.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sporting young men, ha? Gay young truants, ha?
Well, we mustn’t be too strict. Do ’em good, I daresay,
on a fine afternoon. Probably catch nothing but a perch
or two! Certainly, Roger. I’ve no objection, Roger.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the man still remained where he was.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They <span class='it'>did</span> say, Sir, that you said something the other
night to them, Sir, about——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mr. Urquhart interrupted him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve no time now. I’m busy with Mr. Solent. Tell
’em to clear off and fish all they like. There’s nothing
more, Roger, thank you. Tell ’em to fish the pond from
end to end, but not to trample down the rushes. Tell ’em
to be careful of the rushes, Roger. That’s all, Roger.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His last words were uttered in such a final and dismissing
tone, that the man, having given him one quick
interrogative look, swung round on his heels and left
the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Squire turned to Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A little sport for the populace, eh, Solent? Do ’em
good, what? Doesn’t pay to be too strict these days.
Seignorial rights and that sort o’ thing grown a bit old-fashioned,
ha?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The conversation lapsed after this, and they returned
to their investigations concerning the Cerne Giant.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was Mr. Urquhart’s part to select, from the mass
of their material, the particular aspects of Dorset history
which lent themselves to their work. It was Wolf’s business
to purge and winnow and heighten these to the general
level of the style which they had adopted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Every bibliophile in England’ll have this book on
his shelves one day, Solent,” remarked the Squire, after
about half-an-hour’s work.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf did not reply. For some reason he lacked the
faintest flicker of an author’s pride in what they were
doing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They worked on for nearly a whole hour after this.
Then Mr. Urquhart suddenly uttered these strange words.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It would be wonderful to see one’s sponge and one’s
hair-brush as they’d look just then.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf hurriedly gathered his wits together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You mean after you’d decided upon it?” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart nodded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’d see ’em in a sort of fairy-story light, I fancy,”
he went on, “much as infants see ’em, when they’re so
damned well-pleased with themselves that they chirp
like grass-hoppers. It would be nice to see things like
that, Solent, don’t you think so? Stripped clear of the
mischief of custom? It .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. would .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. be .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. nice .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to see .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. anything .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. like that!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His voice assumed a languid and dreamy tone, full of
an infinite weariness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf found it difficult to make any intelligent comment.
His own mind was worrying about many teasing
details just then, such as what he was to say to his mother
with regard to Mattie and Olwen, and whether he should
go to Ramsgard between tea and dinner or wait till later
in the evening.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart suddenly rose to his feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s stroll round to Lenty Pond, Solent, and tell
those lads they can bathe if they want to. It’s bathing
they really like,” he added emphatically, “much more
than fishing. Good for the rabble, too, don’t you think so,
Solent, to learn to swim?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf could only patiently acquiesce. He did, however,
snatch a brief glance at his watch.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s nearly four, Sir,” he said. “You won’t mind if
I leave you, after we’ve been over there, and run round
to my mother’s?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man waved his hand with a negligent, indifferent
gesture. It was a mere nothing, this gesture; but in some
queer way it rather chilled Wolf’s blood. “It must have
been,” he thought to himself, “exactly in that way that
the high-priest waved his hand when he uttered the memorable
expression, ‘What is that to <span class='it'>us</span>? See <span class='it'>thou</span> to
that!’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They went out together, and Wolf was almost irritated
by the unnecessary speed with which Mr. Urquhart
walked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They did not, for all this hurry, reach Lenty Pond
uninterrupted. Just as they were entering the field above
the Otters’ house, they came unexpectedly upon Jason.
The poet had—as far as Wolf could make out—been
sitting in the ditch, both for coolness and for seclusion;
but he emerged from his retreat in comparative self-possession,
and accepted Mr. Urquhart’s rather curt
invitation to join them with quiet acquiescence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They all proceeded therefore across the field, Wolf
forgetting his personal anxieties in his interest in the
way his two companions treated each other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your peaches are very fine this year,” said Jason to
the Squire. “And it was a very good idea of yours to
put netting over them. Thieves are afraid of touching
netting. It’s like the Latin words at the beginning of a
psalm. It makes fruit seem more than fruit—something
sacred, I mean.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You must make my gardener pick you some of the
sacred fruit when you next explore my garden,” said
Mr. Urquhart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ve put your garden-seats in such a very well-chosen
place,” went on the poet, in an eager, propitiatory
manner. “None of these country fools understand why
your garden-seats are between the yew-hedges and the
privet-hedges. They’ve no more idea of how garden-seats
should be arranged—I mean, with regard to shadows—than
a Sturminster goose has of the taste of Tangerine
oranges.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope,” said Mr. Urquhart drily, “that you will not
fail to take advantage of <span class='it'>all</span> the shadows in my garden
when you happen to be there.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf glanced at the Squire’s face as he spoke, and
was startled by its look of agitated annoyance. But Jason
went on rapidly, his cheeks growing more and more
flushed, and a queer dark glow showing itself in his
eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There are idiots who can’t enjoy that shrubbery of
yours, Mr. Urquhart, just because the bushes aren’t
trimmed. Untrimmed shrubberies are by far the best.
Children and fairies are safe there. Silly old women
can’t walk about in them and God can’t get into them.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope you’ll never hurt <span class='it'>yourself</span>, Otter, when you
happen to be walking about in my shrubberies.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tone in which his employer uttered these words
did not altogether surprise Wolf. In his earlier conclusions
about these two men he had taken for granted that
Jason was helpless in Mr. Urquhart’s hands. He had
already begun to waver a little in this view.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They now arrived at the edge of Lenty Pond, and
Wolf was amused by the sight of two naked figures,
splashing, gesticulating, and clinging to the branches of
a submerged willow. It was clear that Mr. Urquhart’s
“populace” had not waited for any formal permission to
substitute bathing for fishing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hullo, lads! You’ve done very wisely, I see,” said
the lord of the manor, approaching the edge of the water
and leaning on his cane.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Take care of the leeches, you two!” cried Jason with
benevolent unction.</p>

<p class='pindent'>If Wolf had been previously struck by the unrestrained
manner in which the poet had rallied the great
man, he was still more arrested by the change that now
came over Mr. Otter’s expressive face. It had been stonily
self-centred when he came out of the ditch. It had
been twitching with mischief as he talked. It now became
suddenly suffused with a kind of abandoned sentimentality.
Every trace of nervousness passed out of it
and every shadow of misery. It seemed to be illuminated
by some soft inner light, not a radiant light, but a pallid,
phosphorescent nebulosity, such as might have accompanied
the religious ecstasy of a worshipper of will-o’-the-wisps.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lobbie Torp, his thin white figure streaked with green
pond-weed, staggered out of the water and sat down by
the side of Jason on the bank, beating the flies away from
his legs with a muddy willow-branch.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf noticed that the poet’s expression assumed a look
of almost beatific contentment as he proceeded to enter
upon a whispered conversation with the small boy, who
himself, as far as Wolf could see, was too occupied in
casting awe-struck glances at the Squire to give the least
attention to what was being said to him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s not too warm, gentlemen,” called out Bob Weevil,
with a forced shiver, pulling himself up, rather foolishly
and self-consciously, by the tree-trunk in front of
him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why don’t you take a swim, Weevil?” enquired Mr.
Urquhart blandly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He dursn’t, Sir. He’s afeared of they girt water-snakes,”
cried Lobbie Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Bob Weevil’s reply to this taunt was to drop his hold
upon the tree, swing himself round, and strike out boldly
for the centre of the pond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well done, Weevil! Well done!” cried out the Squire
in high delight, watching the flexible muscles and slim
back of the swimmer, as the muddy ripples eddied round
him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Float now, Weevil!” he went on. “Let’s see you float!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The youthful dealer in sausages turned upon his back
and beat the surface of the pond with arms and heels,
causing a solitary moor-hen, that hitherto had remained
in terrified concealment, to rise and flap away through
the thick reeds.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There passed rapidly through Wolf’s mind, while all
this went on, a hurried mental estimate of his own feelings.
He felt—and he frankly confessed it to himself—in
some queer way definitely uncomfortable and embarrassed.
The air of excited well-being around him jarred
upon his nerves as if there were actually present, hovering
with the gnats and midges above that pond, some
species of electricity to which he was completely insensitive.
He felt awkward, ill at ease, and even something of
a fool.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What puzzled him, too, profoundly and annoyingly,
was the fact that the psychic “aura” of the situation
seemed entirely natural and harmless. The presence of
those two lads seemed to have drawn out of both his
equivocal companions every ounce of black bile or complicated
evil.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Squire had the air of an innocent, energetic schoolmaster,
superintending some species of athletic sports.
Jason had the look of an enraptured saint, liberated from
earthly persecution and awakening to the pure ecstasies
of Paradise.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He himself began vaguely wondering, as Bob Weevil
reversed his position and with vigorous strokes approached
the willow-tree, whether the numerous intimations
of peril he had been receiving lately had any reality
in them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had been, he knew well, taking for granted for
many months, that between himself and Mr. Urquhart
there existed some sort of subterranean struggle that
ultimately would articulate itself in some volcanic explosion.
But at this moment, half-hypnotized by the
heavy sunshine, by the disturbed waters of Lenty Pond,
by the classic nakedness of the two youths, he found
himself beginning to wonder if the whole idea of this
psychic struggle were not a fancy of his brain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sense that this might be the case had an extremely
disconcerting effect upon him, and seemed to menace
with doubt and confusion one of the dominant motive-powers
of his identity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He knew very well why it had this effect. His whole
philosophy had been for years and years a deliberately
subjective thing. It was one of the fatalities of his temperament
that he completely distrusted what is called
“objective truth.” He had come more and more to regard
“reality” as a mere name given to the most lasting
and most vivid among all the various impressions of
life which each individual experiences. It might seem
an insubstantial view of so solid a thing as what is called
“truth”; but such was the way he felt, and he thought
he would never cease to feel like that. At any rate, one
of his own most permanent impressions had always
been of the nature of an extreme dualism, a dualism
descending to the profoundest gulfs of being, a dualism
in which every living thing was compelled to take part.
The essence of this invisible struggle he was content to
leave vague and obscure. He was not rigid in his definitions.
But it was profoundly necessary to his life-illusion
to feel the impact of this mysterious struggle and to
feel that he was taking part in it. What had come over
him now as he watched the shining body of Mr. Weevil,
surmounted by his impudent water-rat face, as the self-conscious
youth once more began his gymnastics with
the willow-tree, was a sort of moral atrophy. Sitting
on the bank, hugging his knees, at a little distance from
Jason and Lobbie, he had time to watch the Squire, and
he was struck by the purged and almost hieratic look
which the man now wore, as he stood leaning upon his
cane, encouraging the silly manœuvres of the sausage-seller.
“He looks like a mediæval bishop watching a
tournament,” Wolf said to himself. And the placid sunburnt
sympathy he felt for the man’s amiable passivity
seemed seeping in upon him like a warm salt-tide—a
tide that was outside any “dualism”—a tide that was
threatening the banked-up discriminations of his whole
life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then all in a moment he asked himself a very searching
question.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What would I feel at this moment,” he said to himself,
“if Weevil were a girl and Lobbie a little girl?
Should I in that case be quite untroubled by this Giorgione-like
<span class='it'>fête-champêtre</span>? No!”—so he answered his
own question—“I should feel just as uncomfortable
even then at my complicity. It isn’t a question of the
sex .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it’s a question of something else .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it’s a
question of——” A noisy splash made by Lob as he
darted into the water, and a still louder splash made by
Mr. Weevil as he plunged to meet him, interrupted
Wolf’s train of ideas.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He glanced at his watch. It was a quarter to five. He
scrambled to his feet and picked up his stick. “I must
rush off,” he cried. “You’ll excuse me, Sir? We’ll meet
again soon, Otter. Good-bye, Weevil! Good-bye, Lobbie!
Don’t stay in too long or you’ll catch a chill, and I
shall get into trouble with the family.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart and Jason seemed as indifferent to his
departure as if he had been an inquisitive Guernsey cow
who had approached them and then gone off with a
flick of her tail. As he walked across the field he had
an uneasy sense that he was retreating from some occult
arena where he had suffered an irreversible defeat. The
stirring of the waters of Lenty was evidently perilous
to him!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found his mother sitting over the tea-table in Roger
Monk’s trim house, sewing artificial poppies round her
hat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>During their tea together he related all he chose to
relate of the hatter’s death. His mother, however, with
her accustomed airy directness, like the swoop of a
kestrel, pounced at once on the main issue.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s what I wanted to discuss with you,” she said.
“What’s going to happen to those Smith girls?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She gave him one of her sharp, quick looks, full of
worldly sagacity and yet full of a kind of humorous recklessness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No one has the least idea,” he responded. “I wish I
could do something for them. But I don’t see how I can.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mother looked mischievously and affectionately
at him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly, coming round the table, she kissed him with
a series of little bird-like pecks. “There’s no one like
my Lambkin,” she said lightly, “for being too good to
live!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Having thus given him the feeling—how well he knew
it!—that the very deepest stretch of his spirit only appeared
as a pretty little pet-dog trick to her cynical
maternal eroticism, she went back again, round the table,
to her seat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She drank more tea after that and ate more bread-and-butter,
and Wolf received the impression that his
obvious concern over Mattie and Olwen had for some
reason given her a deep sense of satisfaction.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was certainly a relief to him that this was so; and
yet, as he met her warm, ironical, half-mischievous
glance, a glance full of a sort of gloating tenderness that
laughed at both itself and its object, he felt obscurely
uneasy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope,” he said at last, “that I shan’t inflict my
philanthropies on Gerda. Fortunately she’s got a very
sweet nature.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A somewhat grim look passed over Mrs. Solent’s face.
Her adamantine chin was pushed forward; and her
under-lip, like the under-lip of a carnivore, protruded
itself in an extremely formidable manner.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t see your pretty Gerda putting herself out for
anybody,” she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf began instantaneously to grow angry—far more
angry than he could himself account for.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s as anxious about them as I am,” he retorted
hotly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She knows you too well, Wolf, to dare to thwart
you,” remarked Mrs. Solent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s her generous nature!” he cried, with a trembling
lip. “It’s pure-and-simple magnanimity, such as not another
girl in the world would show!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mother’s massive face, under her weight of silver
hair, darkened to a dull red.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m afraid you spoil us all, Lambkin,” she said,
with a wicked, airy little laugh. “But your Gerda knows
how to play her cards.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had never spoken to him in this tone before. The
magnetic current of his anger had touched an evil chord
in her own nature, and her laugh was sardonic.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Play her cards!” he cried in high indignation. “She’s
utterly incapable of such a thing! I wish you’d learn
the same sweet generosity, Mother! It’s you who ‘play
your cards,’ as you call it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Solent rose to her feet, her face pale now and
hard-set as flint.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’d have done better to have gone back to Blacksod
this afternoon, Wolf,” she said, “if that’s how you feel
about me!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mother, you are absolutely unfair!” he cried. “And
you’ve always been unfair about Gerda. You hate her
for some unknown absurd reason. Pure snobbishness
most likely! And you’d like to hurt her, to make her
suffer, to spoil her life. That’s why—oh, I see it now!—you’re
so glad I’m fussed up about Mattie. You think
that will spoil everything for Gerda; and you are glad
that it should!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She came again round the table now, but with a very
different purpose from her previous gesture; and yet,
as Wolf knew well, it was the same savage eroticism that
dominated both these movements.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I care nothing, not one crow’s-feather, for your pretty,
brainless Gerda!” she cried, standing quite close to him,
her left hand on the handle of the silver cake-basket
which formed the centre of the tea-table, and her right
hand opening and shutting as if it were galvanized.
“I’ve been good to her, to please you; and I’ve been made
a fool of for my trouble. Don’t you think I don’t know
how little I count any more in your life, Wolf? Nothing
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. nothing .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. nothing! You just come and see
me. You flatter me and cajole me. But you never stay!
Do you realize you haven’t stayed one night under the
same roof with me, since you married? Oh, it’s all right!
I don’t complain. I’m growing an old woman; and old
women aren’t such pleasant companions as brainless
little girls! Oh, it’s all right! But it’s a funny experience,
this being shelved and superannuated while your feelings
are just as young as anyone’s!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her voice, as she let herself be overwhelmed by a
blind rush of accumulated self-pity, began to break and
choke; and then, all in a moment, it rose to a terrible,
ringing intensity, like the sound of a great sea-bell in a
violent storm.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all right! I can stand it!” she cried. “I had
plenty of practice with your father, and now I’m going
to have the same thing with you.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Oh, it’s a cruel
thing to be a woman!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She pushed back her grey hair from her forehead
with one hand, while the other twitched frantically at
her waist-band. Never had her handsome features looked
more noble; never had her whole personality projected
such magnificent, such primeval passion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf, as he watched her, felt weak, despicable, faltering.
He felt like a finical attendant watching the splendid
fury of some Sophoclean heroine. He became aware
that her anger leaped up from some incalculable crevasse
in the rock-crust of the universe, such as he himself had
never approached. The nature of her feeling, its directness,
its primordial simplicity, reduced his own emotion
to something ridiculous. She towered above him there
with that grand convulsed face and those expanded
breasts; while her fine hands, clutching at her belt,
seemed to display a wild desire to strip herself naked
before him, to overwhelm him with the wrath of her
naked maternal body, bare to the outrage of his impiety.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the storm of her abandonment, the light irony that
was her personal armour against life seemed to drop
from her, piece by glittering piece, and fall tinkling
upon the floor. Something impersonal rose up in its place,
an image of all the stricken maternal nerves that had vibrated
and endured through long centuries; so that it
became no longer just a struggle between Wolf Solent
and Ann Solent—it became a struggle between the
body of Maternity itself and the bone of its bone!</p>

<p class='pindent'>She broke now into desperate sobs and flung herself
face-down upon the sofa. But the demon that tore at her
vitals was not yet content. Turning half-round towards
Wolf, and lifting herself up by her arms, she raised a
long, pitiful howl like a trapped leopard in the jungle.
“Women .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. women .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. women!” she cried aloud;
and then, to Wolf’s consternation, propping herself upon
one of her arms, she held out the other with her first-finger
extended, menacing, prophetic, straight towards
him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s he who’s doing all this to me! You needn’t think
that you could do it alone! It’s both of you. It’s both!
But, oh, you great, heavy, stupid, clumsy lumps of selfishness.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Something, some day, will make you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
I don’t know what.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Something, one day .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. will
make you.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Something will do it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. one day .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
and I shall be glad.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Don’t expect anything else.
I shall be glad!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She drew in her arm and buried her face in the sofa,
her body heaving with long, dry, husky sobs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf surveyed her form as she lay there, one strong
leg exposed as high as the knee, and one disarranged
tress of wavy grey hair hanging across her cheek. And
it came over him with a wave of remorseful shame that
this formidable being, so grotesquely reduced, was the
actual human animal out of whose entrails he had been
dragged into light and air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His remorse, however, was not a pure or simple emotion.
It was complicated by a kind of sulky indignation
and by a bitter sense of injustice. The physical shamelessness,
too, of her abandonment shocked something in
him, some vein of fastidious reverence. But his mother’s
cynicism had always shocked this element in his nature;
and what he felt now he had felt a thousand times before—felt
in the earliest dawn of consciousness. What he
would have liked to do at that moment was just to slip
out of the room and out of the house. Her paroxysm
roused something in him which, had she known it, she
would have recognized as more dangerous than any
responsive anger. But this feeling did not destroy his
pity; so that, as he now sombrely contemplated those
grey hairs, and that exposed knee, he felt a more poignant
consciousness of what she was, than he had ever
felt at the times when he admired her most and loved
her most.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He let himself sink down in his chair and covered his
mouth with his hand as if to hide a yawn. But he was
not yawning. This was an old automatic gesture of his:
perhaps originally induced by his consciousness that his
mouth was his weakest and most sensitive feature and
the one by which the sufferings of his mind were most
quickly betrayed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he suddenly became aware that the sobs had
ceased; and a second later he received a most queer
impression, the impression, namely, that one warm, glowing,
ironical brown eye was fixed upon him and was
steadily regarding him—regarding him through the disordered
tress of ruffled hair that lay across it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He drew his hand from his mouth, rose to his feet
quickly, and, bending down above his mother, pulled her
up from a recumbent into a sitting posture.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mother, don’t!” he cried. “You’re laughing at me;
you’re pretending! And I might have done I don’t know
what, because you scared me so. You’ve just been teasing
your poor son, and frightening him out of his wits;
and now you’re laughing at me!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He fell on his knees in front of her and she let her
touzled forehead sink down till it rested against his;
and there they remained for a while, their two skulls in
a happy trance of relaxed contact, full of unspoken reciprocities,
like the skulls of two animals out at pasture,
or the branches of two trees exhausted by a storm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was conscious of abandoning himself to a vast
undisturbed peace—a peace without thought, aim, or
desire—a peace that flowed over him from the dim reservoirs
of prenatal life, lulling him, soothing him, hypnotizing
him—obliterating everything from his consciousness
except a faint delicious feeling that everything <span class='it'>had</span>
been obliterated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was his mother herself who broke the spell. She
raised her hands to his head and held it back by his
stubbly straw-coloured hair, pressing, as she did so,
her own glowing tear-stained cheeks against his chin,
and finally kissing him with a hot, intense, tyrannous
kiss.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rose to his feet after that and so did she; and,
moved by a simultaneous impulse, they both sat down
again at the deserted tea-table, emptied the teapot into
their cups, and began spreading for themselves large
mouthfuls of bread-and-butter with overflowing spoonfuls
of red-currant jam.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt as if this were in some way a kind of sacramental
feast; and he even received a queer sensation, as
though their mutual enjoyment of the sweet morsels they
swallowed so greedily were an obscure reversion to those
forgotten diurnal nourishments which he must have
shared with her long before his flesh was separated from
hers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Half-an-hour later he was walking leisurely towards
Ramsgard along that now so familiar road. He recalled
his first acquaintance with this road, that day he drove
over by the side of Darnley Otter; and as he began to
approach the town, he found himself glancing across
the fields to his right, toward the lane that led to the
cemetery, and then across the fields to the left, toward
the broader highway which he had followed on the preceding
night, his head full of Mr. Smith’s death.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Roads and lanes! Lanes and roads! What a part these
tracks for the feet of men and beasts, dusty in Summer,
muddy in Winter, had played in his mental consciousness!
The thrill that this idea of roadways gave him was
a proof to him that his mind was returning to its independent
orbit, after its plunge into that maternal hypnosis.
His spirit felt indeed deliciously free just then,
and expanded its wings to its heart’s content, like a
great flapping rook. Every object of the way took on
an especial glamour; and never had he enjoyed so
deeply one peculiar trick of his mind. This was a certain
queer, sensuous sympathy he could feel sometimes
for completely unknown people’s lives, as he passed by
their dwellings. He enjoyed it now with especial satisfaction,
thinking of the people in each cottage he came
to, and gathering their experiences together as one might
gather a bunch of ragwort or hemp-agrimony out of the
dusty hedges.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Well enough did he know how many of these experiences
were bitter and grotesque; but what he enjoyed
now, along with all these unknown people, was their moments
of simple, sensuous well-being.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Such a moment he himself felt presently, as he leaned
over a gate to rest, just before the road he traversed
entered the outskirts of Ramsgard. Through the warm,
misty evening, full of what seemed to him a veritable
diffused essence of gold-dust, there came some quick wandering
breaths of cooler air; and these breaths of air,
brushing against his face and passing swiftly upon their
way, carried a peculiar fragrance with them, a fragrance
that made him think of a certain little garden of old-fashioned
pinks that he used to pass, on his way to the
place where he gave his lectures, down a narrow West
London alley. If in Mr. Urquhart’s library he had been
stirred by Roger Monk’s flower-beds, he was more stirred
now by this far-off impression. The pinks were meagre
enough in themselves. But the thought of them in their
sun-baked little garden, so close to the hot pavement,
touched some chord of seminal memory that gave him
just then a transporting thrill.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Where did it come from, this emotion? Was it an
inherited feeling, reverting to days when some remote
ancestor of his, in cloister or market-place, used to inhale
day by day that particular sweetness? Or was it
something larger and more general than this? Certainly
what he felt just now, as these cool-wafted airs came over
the yellow stubble, was not confined to the pinks in that
hot little garden behind iron railings. It was much more
as if he were enabled to enter, by a lucky psychic sensitiveness,
into some continuous stream of human awareness—awareness
of a beauty in the world that travelled
lightly from place to place, stopping here and stopping
there, like a bird of passage, but never valued at its
true worth until it had vanished away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There <span class='it'>must</span> be,” he thought, “some deep race-memory
in which these things are stored up, to be drawn upon
by those who seek for them through the world—a memory
that has the power of obliterating infinite débris,
while it retains all these frail essences, these emanations
from plants and trees, roadsides and gardens, as if such
things actually possessed immortal souls!” He turned
from the gate and pursued his road, swinging his stick
from side to side like a madman, and repeating aloud,
as he strode along, the words “immortal souls.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Certain human expressions, meaning one thing to the
philosopher and quite another thing to the populace,
were always fascinating to Wolf. His mind began to
dwell now upon the actual syllables of this phrase, “immortal
souls,” until by a familiar transformation those
formidable sounds took on a shadowy personality of
their own—took on the shape, in fact, of Christie Malakite—and
in that shape went wavering away over the
fields like a thin spiral cloud! “These quaint words, used
by the men of old time,” he said to himself, “to describe
what we all feel, have more in them than people have
any idea of. I must tell Christie that!” And then it
occurred to him how impossible it would be to explain
to any living intelligence the faltering thoughts that had
ended by his invocation of the “soul” of a tiny London
garden and his embodying it in the wraith of the daughter
of Mr. Malakite!</p>

<p class='pindent'>It still kept hovering in front of his mind, however—this
phrase, “immortal souls”—even after it had
slipped like a boat from its moorings. There seemed a
noble and defiant challenge in it to all that petered out,
to all that flagged, that wilted, that scattered, that became
nothing, in the melancholy drift of the world!</p>

<p class='pindent'>With the cool airs of that summer evening wafted about
him, he felt, as he passed now under the vast shadow
of the Abbey-church, that there were immense resources
of renewal, of restoration, spread abroad over the face
of the earth, such as had hardly been drawn upon at all
by the sons and daughters of men. “Why is it,” he
thought, “that this particular expression, ‘immortal
souls,’ should act upon my mind in this way?” And as
he moved slowly along now between the sculptured entrance
to the School-House and the little low-roofed
shop where the straw-hatted boys of the School bought
their confectionery, it occurred to him as curiously significant
that the syllable “God,” so talismanic to most
people, had never, from his childhood, possessed the
faintest magic for him! “It must be,” he thought, as,
passing under a carved archway, he came bolt upon the
old monastic conduit, “that anything suggestive of metaphysical
unity is distasteful to me. It must be that my
world is essentially a manifold world, and my religion,
if I have any, essentially polytheistic! And yet, in matters
of good and evil”—and he recalled his sensations at
Lenty Pond—“I’m what they’d call a dualist, I suppose.
Ay! It’s funny. Directly one comes to putting feelings
into words, one is compelled to accept hopeless contradictions
in the very depths of one’s being!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved right in, under the carved roof of the old
conduit, between the Late Gothic pillars, and laid his
hand on the edge of the water-trough. The traffic of the
high-street passed him by, and groups of tall straw-hatted
schoolboys brushed past him, cold, remote,
haughty, discreet, like young Romans in some Ionian
market-place.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A barrel-organ was being played where the pavement
widened, under the out-jutting gables of a mediæval hostelry;
and Wolf couldn’t help noticing how the abstracted,
impassive expression of the old man who played
it contrasted with a couple of ragged little children,
glowing-cheeked and intent, who danced to its jigging
tune.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Polytheism .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. dualism,” he repeated, trying to retain
the philosophical distinctions which he felt crumbling
to bits and drifting away. But as he fumbled with
his fingers at that conduit-trough and turned automatically
a leaden faucet so that water gushed out over his
hand, his mind seemed to reject every single one of those
traditional human catchwords.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I just told him it was all bloody rot!” The words
fell upon his ears from the lips of a pale-faced, quiet
lad, who, with an arm round the neck of another, swung
past Wolf’s retreat; and they served to give his thoughts
an edge.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All bloody rot!” he mumbled, turning off the water
and throwing a nervous glance round him, lest his proceedings
should have attracted attention. “But there’s
more in all this, all the same, than any of these words
implies. That’s the whole thing. Not less, but more!
More; though more of <span class='it'>what</span>, I don’t suppose I shall ever
discover! But more of something.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And as he left the conduit and made his way up the
street, he had the feeling that his real self was engaged
in an exciting maze of transactions, completely different
from those which just now occupied his senses and his
will.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found the Smith ménage, when Mattie’s little maid,
smiling and radiant at the presence of so much drama,
admitted him after a long wait upon the doorstep, burdened
by the presence of two portly and extremely loquacious
undertakers. Contrary to custom, but due to
the nature of his illness and the heat of the weather, it
had become advisable to place the Hatter of Ramsgard
in his elm-wood coffin without further delay.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie had brought Olwen down into the dining-room,
so as to remove her from the sound of the hammering;
but the child was nervous and preoccupied, and it was
with but a languid interest that she busied herself with
the black ribbons of Gipsy and Antoinette, laid side by
side on the great mahogany table, with the cushion from
Mr. Smith’s chair under their waxen heads. Even Wolf’s
arrival did not really distract her; and he would have
given much to know what the thoughts actually were
that gave to her little oval face that sombre pallor and
frowning intensity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie herself seemed strangely lethargic as she drew
up one of the straight-backed leather-covered chairs and
sat down by his side; and Wolf found it difficult, as
they both stared at the unsympathetic silver on the sideboard,
to broach the subject of her future, with which
his mind was so full.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Knock .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. knock .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. knock,” went the hammer
in the room above, accompanied by the low-toned rumble
of conversation from the two intruders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Death is a queer thing,” thought Wolf, while the
weary indifference of Mr. Smith’s white face dominated
the slow passing of the minutes. “Would anyone know
by that sound,” he thought, “that those were coffin-nails?
There’ll be another sound when they put him
into the hole,” so his mind ran on; “there’ll be that peculiar
sound of loose, dry mould flung on the top of a
wooden lid. All the world over, those same two sounds.
Well, not quite <span class='it'>all</span> the world over. But how many times
had Mr. Smith heard that hammering and that rattle of
earth-mould? Did he sit in this very place when they
were nailing Lorna in? I must break this uncomfortable
silence,” he thought. “There! <span class='it'>That</span> must have been the
last! But what the devil are they doing now? This silence
is worse than the hammering. Are they having a
drink?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a sharp ring at the doorbell; and the
three strained faces in that dusky dining-room glanced
anxiously at one another, while the patter of the maid’s
feet on the tiled floor responded to this new sound.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A minute later and they all rose hurriedly, while to
their complete surprise Mrs. Otter and Darnley were
ushered into the room. The little lady seemed perturbed
and embarrassed at the presence of Wolf, but Darnley
gave him a quick reassuring nod.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I heard by chance,” began Mrs. Otter rapidly. “We
were so sorry for you. I wanted to come. My son was
very good. He got me a carriage. I hope you don’t mind
my coming.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I am sure it’s very nice of you, Mrs. Otter,” murmured
Mattie. “Sit down, won’t you? Sit down, please,
Mr. Otter. Thank you, Wolf. No, that’s been broken for
years.” Wolf made a fumbling attempt to replace the
piece of carved mahogany that had come off in his
hand. This mechanical preoccupation enabled him to
notice in silence the manner in which Darnley and Mattie
had begun to stare at each other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What I had in my mind, in coming to you, my poor
child,” he heard Mrs. Otter say, “was to ask a great and
really rather a difficult favour. What I came to say
was this .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. oh, I don’t know whether I ought to
worry you now about it! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but my son .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I mean
Jason .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. told me I might do just as I liked.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. My
house is my own, you know!” This last rather unexpected
phrase was uttered with such a winning and whimsical
smile that Wolf looked hastily at Mattie, very anxious
that she should say nothing to hurt this visitor’s
feelings. He was surprised to observe that Mattie had
only in the vaguest manner caught the drift of this
speech.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, Mrs. Otter, you’ve always been most kind to
me,” was all she said in reply.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My son left everything completely in my hands.
Didn’t he, Darnley?” Mrs. Otter went on. There was a
perplexed frown on her face now; and she made a feeble
little movement of one of her hands towards Darnley,
as if appealing to him for help.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Didn’t he, Darnley?” she repeated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Darnley also seemed to have lost the drift of her
remarks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You were quite right, Mother,” he replied at random.
“You’re awfully wise when things are getting serious.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. She’s wonderful in a crisis.” He addressed this
last remark to no one in particular, and it did little to
help forward the general air of cloudiness into which the
conversation had fallen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She really is .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. wonderful in a crisis,” he repeated
absent-mindedly; and Wolf, as he looked at the
lethargic silver on the sideboard, seemed to hear the
voice of the cake-basket addressing the biscuit-bowl,
“She’s wonderful in a crisis,” in the tone of an ancient
play-goer commenting on an oft-repeated play.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mattie doesn’t know what ever we shall do.” The
words came from Olwen, who now stood close to Wolf’s
chair; and the words served to bring matters to a head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s just what I’m talking about,” said Mrs. Otter,
in such an eager tone that everyone turned towards her
with full attention.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What I came to ask you was this,” she said firmly,
addressing herself to Mattie. “Our Dimity is getting
feeble and old, and I’m not as strong as I was. My son—Jason,
I mean—is very particular. You know what he
is, my dear? What a poet he is. Mr. Solent thinks he’s
a <span class='it'>great</span> poet, don’t you, Mr. Solent? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Well, what I
came to say is this. It would be such a pleasure to us all,
my dear”—here she laid her grey-gloved hand lightly
on Mattie’s wrist—“if you’d come and live with us and
help me—you know?—help me with everything. Now
don’t shake your head like that! I know what you mean.
Of course, this little one must come, too, and of course
we’ve got to think of her lessons.” The little lady drew
a long breath, but hurried on before Mattie could utter
a word. “It’s her lessons I was thinking about. I’m very
fond of teaching children, children that I <span class='it'>like</span>, I mean;
and I’ve got <span class='it'>all</span> the fairy-stories. I’ve got the one they
wouldn’t let me even see the pictures of, when <span class='it'>I</span> was
little.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had already screwed his head round so as to
snatch a glimpse of Olwen’s face, and he was surprised
at the grave glow of unrestrained delight that was now
slowly beginning to spread over it. But Mattie still shook
her head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I couldn’t,” she murmured in a faint voice. “Though
it’s very, very kind of you, Mrs. Otter. But I could never
think of such a thing. Olwen and I have been talking
about it and we’ve made up our minds that I must go
to work. Olwen says she’ll be good when I leave her and
not fret or be lonely.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At this moment there was a sound of heavy footsteps
descending the stairs, accompanied by a few muffled
remarks of a facetious kind. Mrs. Otter glanced at Wolf,
who gave her a slight inclination of the head. She turned
to Mattie hurriedly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, my dear,” she said. “I don’t want to rush you
against your will into anything. Though I did set my
heart upon it and I’ve thought about it from every possible
side.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie’s answer to this was to stretch forth her hand
and press lightly the gloved fingers of the little old
lady. But the look which she gave her showed no sign
of yielding. It was very tender; but it was firm and
resolute.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was another pause then among them all; and
once more Wolf was aware of a most vivid sense of Mr.
Smith’s white, set face, exhausted, detached, commenting
with a kind of desolating equanimity upon the events
that were taking place. Those ponderous silver pieces
seemed to Wolf now, as he frowned upon them, to be
gathering themselves together in that darkening room, to
be shaping themselves with shadowy persistence into
funereal ornaments heaped up beside the dead hatter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One of the windows behind Wolf’s head was open, and
with the noises of the street there entered and circled
round him a deliciously cool air, an air like that which
he had been conscious of on his approach to Ramsgard,
as he leaned over that gate. Once more the scent of
pinks came quivering through his brain and he felt a
shameless thrill of pleasure. This time, instead of the
wraith of Christie Malakite, it was the body of the hatter
that associated itself with that remembered scent—not
any repulsive odour of mortality emerging from those
nailed-up boards, but rather some spiritual essence from
the presence of Death itself. And as he breathed this air,
the voices of his companions became a vague humming
in his ears, and all manner of queer detached memories
floated in upon him. He felt himself to be walking alone
along some high white road bordered by waving grasses
and patches of yellow rock-rose. There was a town far
below him, at the bottom of a green valley—a mass of
huddled grey roofs among meadows and streams—round
which the twilight was darkening. Along with all this he
was conscious of the taste of a peculiar kind of baker’s
bread, such as used to be sold at a shop in Dorchester,
where, as a child, they would take him for tea during
summer jaunts from Weymouth. The presence of Death
seemed to re-create these things and to touch them with
a peculiar intensity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was roused from his trance by the clear, shrill
voice of Olwen arguing desperately with Mattie.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I <span class='it'>want</span> to do what she says! Why <span class='it'>can’t</span> we do what
she says? I’ll be bad if you don’t let us! I won’t go to
sleep. I’ll be far worse than Gipsy or Antoinette. I’ll tear
my hair out! I’ll bite my hand!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hush, Olwen!” he heard Mattie reply. “Mrs. Otter
will be only too pleased I can’t accept her offer if you
talk like that.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little girl gazed at her for a moment with a quaint,
solemn scrutiny. Then she laughed, a merry reassured
laugh, and, rushing to where Darnley was sitting, slid
coaxingly upon his knee.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll tell her what she must do when everyone’s
gone,” she murmured softly; and then, with her eyes
fixed upon his face, she stroked his beard with her small,
nervous hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Otter and Wolf smiled at each other; and there
came into Wolf’s mind those scenes in Homer where
girlish suppliants, mortal as well as immortal, lay their
hands upon the chins of those they are cajoling!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Would you tear <span class='it'>my</span> hair out as well as your own,”
enquired Darnley, “if she goes on refusing to let you
live with us?” Wolf thought he had never seen Darnley’s
eyes look so deeply luminous as they did while he uttered
those words.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie still shook her head; but although there were
tears on her cheek, the whole expression of her face was
relaxed and at peace. Indeed, as Wolf kept surreptitiously
glancing at her, he got the impression that the
girl longed to rush away and burst into a flood of crying,
but not into unhappy crying. The kindred blood in
his veins made him clairvoyant; and he felt convinced
that if the Otters refused to accept her rejection of their
scheme, she would eventually be persuaded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, my dear child,” he heard Mrs. Otter saying,
“you must not answer us in a hurry like this. You see
what friends Darnley and your little one have already
become; and if only——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She stopped suddenly; for there came a second ring
at the street-door, followed by the same impetuous rush
of the little maid across the hall. This time Wolf looked
with dismay into his sister’s face when he heard a well-known
voice asking in a loud, firm tone for Miss Smith.
They all got up when Miss Gault was shown into the
room. Olwen hastily snatched her dolls from the table
and carried them off to Mr. Smith’s big leather chair by
the fireplace; and Mrs. Otter, after a hurried bow to
the new visitor, followed the child to that retreat and
entered into a whispered conversation with her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The presence of Wolf did not seem to be any surprise
to the formidable lady. She nodded at him familiarly,
as she embraced Mattie; but her greeting to Darnley
was stiff and formal. Darnley himself seemed quite unperturbed
by this coldness. His strangely-coloured blue
eyes remained fixed upon Mattie; and he stood with his
back propped against a bookcase, toying with his watch-chain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the darkening twilight of the room—for no one
had thought of asking for a lamp—the man’s slim figure,
as Wolf glanced sideways at him, had the appearance of
some old Van Dyck portrait come to life in a Victorian
house. Behind his back the great heavily-bound editions
of those “Sundays at Home” and “Leisure Hours,” whose
illustrations must have solaced many a long evening in
the far-off childhood of Albert Smith, gathered the summer
darkness about them with that peculiar mystical
solemnity which old books, like old trees and old hedges,
display at the coming on of night. And Wolf, as he listened
with amusement to the discourse of Selena Gault,
became aware that, with one of her chance-flung felicities,
Nature was arranging a singularly appropriate stage
for what at any rate was an exciting encounter between
Darnley Otter and Mattie Smith.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Darnley <span class='it'>must</span> have often met Mattie before,” thought
Wolf. “But very likely never in her own house and probably
never when they could really take in each other’s
personality. Besides .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what do I know about them?
All this may have begun years ago .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. before I came
upon the scene at all. If so, what secretive demons they
both have been!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned once more to his sister. Oh, he couldn’t be
mistaken! Why, the girl’s heavy countenance, even in that
gloom, had a look that he could only describe to himself
as transfigured. “There’s certainly something up,
there,” he thought. “Well! She’ll be a little fool if she
doesn’t take the old lady’s offer. I’d like to know, though,
what Jason <span class='it'>did</span> say when this scheme was suggested!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then, seated a little back from Mattie and Miss
Gault, and accepting a cigarette from Darnley, who now
took a chair by his side, Wolf began to be conscious of
the drift of the amazing discourse which the visitor was
directing, like a cannonade of lumbering artillery, across
the table into the ears of his sister. Selena’s attire was
in good taste enough—indeed, it was superlatively ladylike;
but it was the “rich, not gaudy” attire of a person
quite oblivious of contemporary fashion, and in some
queer way it lent itself so well to the quality of that
room, that it seemed to bring the furniture itself to life
in support of everything she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The gathering darkness assisted at this strange play.
It was as if all the ponderous objects in that room—including
the silver, the chairs, the dark-green curtains,
the grotesque portrait of Mr. Smith’s father, the leather
backs of the “Sundays at Home” and the “Leisure
Hours,” the leather back of a draught-board, with the
words “History of the World” printed on it, the bronze
horses on either side of the mantelpiece, the enormous
empty coal-scuttle—combined together to give weight to
the opinions of this aggressive woman, whose own childhood,
like that of the silent person upstairs, they had
ramparted with their massive solemnities!</p>

<p class='pindent'>And Wolf was astounded at the impertinence of what
Miss Gault did say. It was an impertinence covered up
with bronze and brocade. But it was an indecent impertinence.
It resembled the absurd drapery covering
the symbolic figure of Mercy, or Truth, or Righteousness,
which dominated the great dining-room clock that stood
in the middle of the marble chimneypiece. “I confess I
first thought,” Miss Gault was now saying, “of having
Olwen to live with Emma and me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but I couldn’t
have her teasing the cats .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or pining for you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
so this Home is better. I have made a lot of enquiries
about this Home. I made them last year, for another
purpose; and it’s lucky I did, because people don’t
hear of these things when they really want them. The
beautiful thing about it is that they accept mother <span class='it'>and</span>
child .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and of course Olwen <span class='it'>is</span> like your child now.
Another great advantage about this plan is that Taunton
is so near us all .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. only a couple of hours by train.”
She made a little nod in Wolf’s direction. “Wolf would
be able to run over and see you on Sundays,” she added.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her voice sank; but the darkened room was full of the
echoes of it—the whispering of Mrs. Otter, who was evidently
telling Olwen a story, being the only force that
resisted it. And the dark-green curtains were delighted.
“See you on Sundays .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. see you on Sundays,” they
repeated, while the draught-board “History of the
World” echoed the word “Sundays,” making it seem like
the very voice of that charitable institution which accepted
both mother <span class='it'>and</span> child.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And the little sum required by the authorities,” Miss
Gault continued, “I shall be delighted to provide. I do,
of course, recognize that it was against my advice that
you adopted Olwen. But the child’s naturally fond of
you now; and I think it would be wrong to separate her
from you, as would have to be done if you got employment
here .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. for the child couldn’t be left alone all
day .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and no doubt everything here will be sold.
Don’t answer me just yet,” the lady went on. “I want you,
Wolf, too, to hear all I’ve got to say .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. for, of course
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. well! there’s no need for me to enter into <span class='it'>that</span>
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but what I thought I would ask you now, Mattie
dear, is to tell me what particular things in this house
you’re especially fond of; and then .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. well! I hope
I should be able to be present at the auction .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so
that whenever you <span class='it'>do</span> have a house of your own they’ll
be .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. well! they’ll be, so to speak, still in the family.”
She turned more boldly towards Wolf at this point, as
if to ensure his recognition of her old-fashioned tact.
But Wolf’s impulse at that moment resembled the impulse
of King Claudius in the play. He felt a desire to
cry out in thundering tones, “Lights! lights! lights!” So
that it was still left to the draught-board and the bronze
clock to appreciate such delicacy and to have the last
word.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was not Wolf, but Darnley, however, who broke the
spell thrown upon them by Miss Gault. He walked rapidly
over to his mother, whispered something in her ear,
took her hand, and brought her to Mattie’s side.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll be a dear girl and do what <span class='it'>we</span> want you to
do?” said the old lady clearly and firmly, taking no notice
of Miss Gault.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf thought he caught an appealing glance in his
direction, though it was so dark now that his sister’s face
was a mere blur of whiteness. But he rose hurriedly and
came up to where they were all grouped. There was just
a half-second’s pause, which enabled him to catch an
impress of the whole queer scene before he spoke, to
catch the bewildered anger on Miss Gault’s face, to observe
that Olwen had possessed herself of Darnley’s
hand, to remark how Mrs. Otter was so nervous that the
chair upon which she had laid her fingers tapped on the
floor; and then he himself spoke out with all the weight
he could muster.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m sorry, Miss Gault, and I know Mattie’s most
grateful for your suggestion; but it had all been settled
before you came in. They’re going to stay for the present
with our good friends here. They’re going to do what
<span class='it'>I</span> did when I first came to King’s Barton. There’ll be
time enough later for other arrangements; but for the
moment Mattie’s going to accept Mrs. Otter’s invitation,
and Olwen too. As to the furniture here, we needn’t decide
about <span class='it'>that</span> in any hurry. It may be that Mattie would
be happier to get completely rid of it. I know I should,
in her case. But it’s sweet of you to suggest buying back
some of it. I’m sure Mattie appreciates that very much.
But the chief point just now is what she and Olwen are
going to do; and that has been quite decided—hasn’t
it, Mattie? They’re going to that hospitable Pond Cottage,
where I went for my first night in Dorset!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s voice became more and more decisive as he
brought his declaration to a close; but with an instinct
for preventing any further protests from Mattie, he hurriedly
rushed out into the hall and began calling for
the little maid.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Constantia!” he shouted. “Constantia! Please bring
us the lamp!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>What occurred after his departure from that darkened
dining-room he never knew. His words seemed to
have had the effect of the letting off of a gun in a soundless
wood. For from where he waited at the kitchen-door
there came to him an incoherent murmur of many confused
voices. When at last he returned with the lamp in
his hand and placed it in the centre of the table, Olwen
was crying in the leather armchair, where Mattie and
Mrs. Otter were bending over her; while Miss Gault,
standing erect in the centre of the room, was asking
Darnley in a strained, husky voice whether it was true
that they had recently discovered in the Abbey-church
the actual bones of King Æthelwolf, the brother of Alfred.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-bye, then. Good-bye, all of you! I mustn’t be
in the way any longer.” With this, Miss Gault bowed to
Darnley, nodded in the direction of the weeping child,
and walked straight into the hall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>From Wolf she kept her eyes averted as she passed;
but the expression of her face shocked him, and he followed
her to the street-door. As he bent forward to turn
the handle before she set her own hand upon it, he
caught sight of that deformed lip of hers; and the look
of it appalled him. To see such a thing as that was
bad enough; but it became worse when the extraordinary
visage, that now was face to face with him, contorted
itself, there in the doorway before him, into a
puckered mask of outrage. He felt a little ashamed of
himself for the brutality of his observation at that moment;
but he couldn’t help noticing that Miss Gault made
a much more childish contortion of her face when <span class='it'>she</span>
collapsed than his adamantine mother had done that
same afternoon! His mother had “lifted up her voice,”
as the Scripture says, “and wept”; but Wolf remembered
well how, even when she was howling like a lioness with
a spear in her side, her fine clear-cut features had retained
their dignity. Big tears had fallen, but they had
fallen like rain upon a tragic torso. Very different was
it with Miss Gault at this moment! Three times she made
an attempt to speak to him, and three times her face
grew convulsed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wait a minute!” he blurted out at last, and ran back
into the dining-room. There he shouted a loud good-bye
to them all. “See you tomorrow, Mattie dear!” he cried.
“I leave you in good hands, Olwen. Good-night, Mrs.
Otter!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll come back and have dinner with you, if I may,”
he said, as he caught up Miss Gault on the street-pavement.
“Listen! What’s that striking now?” He laid
his hand on her arm and held her motionless. “Seven
o’clock, ay? Well, you don’t dine till eight; so do let’s
have a bit of a walk before going to your house.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s go to the grave, boy,” she whispered hoarsely.
“We can talk there. My Emma won’t mind, even if we
<span class='it'>are</span> late. But how will you get back to Blacksod?” she
added with concern.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I’ll take the ten-o’clock train,” he said. “That’ll
mean that I shan’t have any more walking and shan’t
keep Gerda up. It runs still at that time, doesn’t it? Or
have they changed it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Miss Gault had already given to practical concerns
all the energy she could spare just then.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How lovely this place is at night!” she said, as they
passed under the Abbey-wall. “I wonder if Mr. Otter is
right and it is really the coffin of King Æthelwolf that
they’ve found.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They reached the main entrance to the building, and
to their surprise they found it open.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s go in for a minute,” said Wolf. His companion
assented in silence and they entered together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I would have liked to have that child to live with
me,” murmured Miss Gault; “but it would have been
cruel to the cats .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. she’s grown so rough to them
lately .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and she’s not always polite to Emma.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf made no reply to this remark; and as they
moved slowly up the central aisle, which was feebly
illuminated from somewhere between the choir-stalls, he
allowed his mind to wander away from Miss Gault and
her thwarted philanthropies. The few lights that were
burning hardly reached—and then only with a dim, diffused
lustre, like the interior of a sand-blurred mother-of-pearl
shell—the high fan-tracery of the roof. Wolf
felt strongly upon him once again that feeling of mystic
exultation which had been hovering over him all day;
and when the presence of the light behind the choir was
explained by a sudden burst of organ-notes, he felt such
a thrill of happiness that it brought with it a reaction of
sheer shame.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Accident!” he muttered to himself. “Pure accident!”
he repeated, as they crossed in front of the altar and
made their way to the lady-chapel behind it. And he
even felt, as he fumbled about in the dim light, looking
for some sign of the Saxon king’s coffin, a sense of having
feloniously stolen his ecstasy from some treasure-house
of the human race! “Why should I,” he thought,
“be singled out by pure chance for this? That Waterloo-steps
face—no King Æthelwolf for him, no fan-tracery,
no scent of pinks—— Is my gratitude to the gods, then,
a base and scurvy feeling?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Even as this thought crossed his mind he stumbled
against some sort of glass framework upon the southern
floor of that lady-chapel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Here we are, Miss Gault!” he whispered excitedly.
“Only, I suppose we shall get into trouble if that organist
hears us. Look here, though, for God’s sake! This
is the king’s coffin!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He went down on his knees and pulled aside in the
dim light a piece of carpet that had been carefully spread
over the glass frame. The unwieldy form of his companion
was promptly now at his side, kneeling too.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dare I strike a match, d’ye think?” he whispered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, no, boy! You mustn’t do that. Wolf, you mustn’t,
you really mustn’t!” murmured the daughter of the
Headmaster of Ramsgard School.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But he disregarded her protest, and, fumbling in his
pocket, produced a match-box and struck a wax vesta.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little yellow flame illuminated the glass-covered
aperture in the floor and threw into such weird relief
the lineaments of Miss Gault as to almost divest them
of their humanity. Only a dim consciousness of this astounding
countenance, so near his own, reached Wolf’s
mind just then. He was too excited. But afterwards, when
he recalled the whole incident, it came back distinctly
upon him as one of those glimpses into something
abominable, ghastly, in Nature’s pranks, such as a person
were wise to make note of, with the rest, as he went
through the world! Here, in the mere possibility of such
a vision—for, to say the truth, Miss Gault’s face by
that match-flare was rendered nothing less than <span class='it'>bestial</span>—was
an experience to be set against those chance-heard
organ-notes that had mounted up so triumphantly among
the torn battle-flags.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Holding the match aloft with his hand, he bent down
until his face actually touched the glass. <span class='it'>Nothing.</span> Certain
interesting chromatic effects .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. certain flickers
and blotches of colour that was no colour, of sparkles
that were opaque, of outlines that were no outlines .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
and then the match burnt his hand and went out. Hurriedly
he lit another and held it up, his burnt hand
smarting. Down went his face till his hooked nose was
pressed against the glass. Sparkles, black, wavering
spots, fluctuating blotches of reddish-yellow, little orbs
of blackness, rimmed with lunar rings; and then again
darkness! <span class='it'>Nothing!</span> Angrily he scrambled to his feet, and
with childish petulance thrust his smarting fingers into
his mouth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The bones are there!” he whispered huskily. “The
bones are there! Æthelwolf himself! But it’s no use. We
must come again by daylight. It’s one of those things
that are so damnably annoying. Quick! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. while the
organ’s still playing! I know what these people are .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
so touchy about their treasures. Let’s get out of here!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He hurried his companion down the great silent nave
and out of the open doorway. He felt much more vexed
and perturbed than the occasion warranted. The meaningless
sparkles from that tricky coffin-lid danced like
imps across the back of his eye-sockets.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I suppose it’s too late to go over there now?” he
said, turning to her with his hat in one hand and his
stick in the other, and a wavering helplessness emanating
from his whole figure.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not at all, boy—not at all!” pronounced Miss Gault.
“Emma must keep supper waiting for us for once. You’ll
have time for a bite anyway before you catch that train.
Come along! You don’t know how fast I can walk.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf put on his hat and strode by her side in silence.
The air began to smell of rain by the time they reached
the slaughter-house. There was a figure with a lantern
moving about in the yard of the shed; and Miss Gault
dragged heavily on his arm as they went past, struggling
with the rising wind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll get no meat with me, boy,” she whispered.
“No meat—no meat. It’s the only way to help them. But
I’d go and be hanged to help ’em .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hanged by the
neck”—the wind caught her voice and rendered it
scarcely audible—“by the neck, boy!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf pondered to himself upon the contradictory nature
of this woman. She would go to the death to put an
end to slaughter-houses; and yet she would pack off
Mattie and Olwen to God knows what kind of an institution
for paupers!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt a secret desire to punish her for this inconsistency,
and he suddenly said: “It’s really amazingly
good of the Otters to take in our friends. To find such
a generous heart in a nervous old lady like that makes
you think better of the whole human race!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A portion of the impulse that led him to this speech as
they passed the slaughter-house was doubtless a throb
of his own conscience over this matter of eating meat.
The sight of that man with a lantern, like some ghoulish
wanderer in a place of execution, impressed itself by
no means pleasantly on his mind; and it was the electric
vibration of this discomfort that gave his voice, as he
uttered these words, a certain quivering pitch of unnecessary
emphasis.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The malice in his tone communicated itself like a magnetic
current to his companion, and she took her hand
from his arm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The child has wheedled herself round Darnley. That’s
all it is. The mother is willing enough, because she sees
what a good unpaid servant Mattie will make. I won’t
talk about it any more, and I didn’t mean to refer to it;
but I think you’re simply mad to let her accept such a
humiliating position. But there it is! The girl can’t have
much pride, or nothing you said or they said could have
made her accept such charity!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His remark having brought about this outburst, he was
able to exclaim in his heart, “You rude, ill-bred old
woman! You rude, ill-bred old woman!” and, having
done this, he felt quite friendly toward her again and
quite appeased.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He pretended to be sulking, however, for the whole
time they remained in the cemetery; though in reality
he was thinking to himself, “What a spirited thing it was,
after all, to stick by my father like that, when he was a
complete social outcast!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They walked home in even deeper silence and at a
rapid pace. It was twenty-five minutes to ten when they
reached Aldhelm Street, only to find Emma in such an
agitated temper that Selena had to go herself into the
kitchen and bring out to him in the sitting-room a plate
of curried eggs and a decanter of sherry.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He sat on her sofa and swallowed this hot dish with
hungry relish, eating it in unceremonious fashion with a
spoon, and tossing off so many glasses of wine that
Selena glanced at him rather nervously as she herself
nibbled a biscuit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Emma does cook well!” he said at last, as he rose
to go. “It’s all right, Miss Gault, dear. You needn’t look
so anxious. I’ve got a head of iron.” And immediately, as
if to prove he had such a head, he felt it to be incumbent
upon him to say something affectionate and tender.
“I believe,” he burst out, “I must have just the same sort
of feeling for you that <span class='it'>he</span> had!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>These were his parting words; but it was not until
he was sitting in a third-class smoking-carriage of the
South-Western train that he began to wonder why it was
that Miss Gault’s face had such a wry smile upon it as
he shook hands with her at her door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was alone in the carriage, and, windy though it was,
he kept the window open and sat facing the engine. The
rush of air sobered him, and he observed with interest
the scattered lights of King’s Barton as the train jolted
along its high embankment between that village and the
Evershott meadows. He wondered humorously to himself
what Jason would say that evening when he learnt of the
new invasion of his privacy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mood saddened before the train stopped at Blacksod.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I knew I were only going to live five more years,”
he thought, “I would give away four of them if I were
allowed to spend the other one, day and night, with
Christie!” And then, as the cold wind made him shiver
a little and turn up his coat-collar, “I wonder,” he
thought, “whether I’m just weak and cowardly in not
leaving them all and carrying Christie off to London,
let happen what may?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The train was now following an umbrageous embankment
parallel with the river Lunt. The muddy smell
of that sluggish water, which the Ramsgard boys irreverently
named “the Bog-stream,” assailed his nostrils,
bringing with it a feeling of obscure misery. A chilliness
in his bones, a weariness in his brain, gave now to
all the events of the day a sombre colour, like the colour
of river-mud.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As the locomotive slowly lessened its speed, he tried
in vain to recall those moments of happiness .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the
vision of the bed of pinks .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the sweet emanation from
the very body of death. But in place of these things all
he could think of was obdurate roots in clinging clay,
sparkles and blotches that bore no human meaning, hammering
of nails into coffins, men with lanterns in
slaughter-house yards, and the pallid loins of Bob Weevil
streaked with the green slime of Lenty Pond.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap15'>ROUNDED WITH A SLEEP</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>August was drawing to its end, and, with August,
the holidays of the Blacksod Grammar School. The young
aristocrats of Ramsgard had several weeks more before
<span class='it'>their</span> new term began, but the humbler pupils whom it
was Wolf’s destiny to teach were now on the eve of their
return to work.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Anxious to make the utmost of these precious mornings
of leisure, now so soon to be snatched from him,
Wolf had lately got into the habit of persuading Gerda
to start out with him, for some sort of rural expedition,
directly the breakfast-things had been washed up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They had explored the country in this way in almost
every direction; but he found that the easiest thing to
do was to have some sort of picnic-lunch in the direction
of King’s Barton, so that when they separated he could
reach his afternoon’s work at the manor without arriving
too tired or too late.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Three days before the Grammar School was to reopen
he had cajoled Gerda into accompanying him to Poll’s
Camp. They had brought their provisions in a basket and
had made their meal in unusual contentment under the
shelter of a group of small sycamores that grew on the
western slope of the camp, overlooking the great Somersetshire
plain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda was now fast asleep. Stretched out upon her
back, she lay as motionless as the shadows about her,
one arm curved beneath her fair head and the other
flung upon a bed of moss. Wolf sat with his arms hugging
his knees, and his back against a sycamore-trunk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The weather had been good for the wheat that Summer,
and not too scorching to the grass; so that what he
looked at now, as he let his eyes wander over that great
level expanse towards Glastonbury, was a vast chess-board
of small green fields, surrounded by pollarded
elms of a yet darker colour, and interspersed by squares
of yellow stubble.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The earthworks of Poll’s Camp were not as deeply dug
or as loftily raised as many Roman-British ramparts in
that portion of the West Country. They were less of a
landmark than Cadbury Camp, for instance, away to the
northwest. They were less imposing than Maiden Castle,
away to the south. But such as they were, Wolf knew
that the mysterious movements of King Arthur .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>rex
quondam rex-que futurus</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. had more than once
crossed and recrossed, in local legend, this promontory
of grassy ridges.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The day was warm; but the fact that the sky was
covered with a filmy veil of grey clouds gave to the vast
plain before him the appearance of a landscape whose
dominant characteristic consisted in a patient effacement
of all emphatic or outstanding qualities. The green
of the meadows was a shy, watery green. The verdure of
the elm-trees was a sombre, blackish monotony. The yellow
of the stubble-land was a whitish yellow, pallid and
lustreless.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He glanced at the sleeping figure of his companion,
and it seemed to him that the milk-white delicacy of
Gerda’s face, as she lay there, had never been touched
by a more tender bloom than it wore today, under this
vaporous, windless sky.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her breathing was so light as to be almost imperceptible,
her lips were just parted in a confiding abandonment
to a happy sleep; while the rounded whiteness
of the bare arm she had flung out upon the moss had
that youthful charm of unconscious trust in the kindness
of man and nature, which, whenever he noted it, always
struck him as one of the most touching of a young girl’s
qualities.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And it was borne in upon him how terrible the responsibility
was when a man had once undertaken to “make,”
as the phrase runs, one of these fragile beings “happy.”
It came upon him, as he watched Gerda asleep, that a
girl is much more committed to what is called “happiness”
than a man is.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Or is it, he thought, that a man can create happiness by
sheer obstinate force out of the machinery of his own
mind, while a girl is dependent upon all manner of
subtle external forces emanating from nature and returning
to nature?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Certainly at this moment Gerda seemed to have most
deliciously abandoned herself to the power of the grass,
the grey sky, the warm, windless air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A sad, helpless craving possessed him as he turned
from the girl and once more surveyed that undemonstrative,
unobtrusive distance. He felt as though he
longed to fly across it in some impossible non-human
shape—fly across it not with any actual living companion,
but with some shadowy essence, light as that
dandelion-seed, which at this moment he saw rising high
above him and floating away westward—with some shadowy
essence that at the same time was and was not
Christie Malakite—some essence that was what Christie
was to her own inmost self, the bodiless, formless identity
in that slim frame, that in confronting infinite space
could only utter the mysterious words, “I am I,” and
utter nothing else.</p>

<p class='pindent'>If only he could do this now, by some occult manipulation
of the laws of nature! Gerda’s sleep was deep
and sound. To her at this moment Time was nothing.
How mad it was that he couldn’t plunge with Christie,
with the inmost soul of Christie, into some region outside
these things, where a moment was like a whole year
of mortal life!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The vast expanse he looked at, had about it, under
this grey sky, something wistful and withdrawn. It resembled
those patient, melancholy fields, neither happy
nor unhappy, where Dante met the souls of the great
intellects in Limbo. With his eyes fixed upon its patient-coloured
horizons, it did not seem so crazy a notion that
he and Christie might meet and escape, lost, merged,
diffused into all this!</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then he turned his gaze upon the beautiful girl
lying there outstretched beside him, happy in her timeless
dream-world, trusting him, trusting nature, half-smiling
in her sleep.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Looking at her lying there, he thought what an appalling
risk these lovers of “happiness” take, when they
burn their ships and trust their lives to the caprice of
men.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he contemplated the loveliness of her figure, it
struck him as infinitely pathetic that even beauty such as
hers should be so dependent on the sexual humours of
this man or that man for its adequate appreciation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Beauty like that, he thought, as he looked at her, ought
to endow its possessor with super-human happiness, as in
the old legends, when the immortal gods made love to
the daughters of men. There was a cruel irony in the
fact that he of all men had been singled out to possess
this beauty—he whose heart of hearts had been given to
a different being!</p>

<p class='pindent'>And as he pondered on all this it struck him as strange
that such rare loveliness should not protect her, like
silver armour, against the shocks and outrages of life.
Beauty as unusual as this was a high gift, like a poet’s
genius, and ought to have the power of protecting a
girl’s heart from the cruel inconstancies of love.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I suppose it is true,” he thought, “that when they
have been a man’s bedfellow, even for a few months,
some peculiar link establishes itself which it is as difficult
to break as if one tore a grafted sapling from the
branch of a tree. I suppose,” so his thoughts drifted
on, “that my love is really more important, in this blind
primordial way, to Gerda—just because we have now
slept together for three months—than it could ever be
to Christie, though <span class='it'>she</span> lives inside my very soul! I suppose
it’s the old fatality of flesh to flesh, of blind matter,
proving itself, after all, the strongest thing on earth.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then, before he had the least notion that his
thoughts would drift in such a direction, he found himself
engaged in a passionate dispute with his father. It
was as if the dispute were actually going on down at the
bottom of that grave; and though he still found himself
calling William Solent “Old Truepenny,” he felt as if
he had become a lean worm down there, in the darkness
of that hollow skull, arguing with it, arguing with what
remained still conscious and critical, although lost “in
the pit.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This world is not made of bread and honey,” cried
Wolf, the worm, to the skull of his father, “nor of the
sweet flesh of girls. This world is made of clouds and of
the shadows of clouds. It is made of mental landscapes,
porous as air, where men and women are as trees walking,
and as reeds shaken by the wind.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the skull answered him in haste and spoke roughly
to him. “What you have found out today, worm of my
folly, I had outgrown when I was in the Sixth at Ramsgard
and was seduced by Western Minor in the Headmaster’s
garden. To turn the world again into mist and
vapour is easy and weak. To keep it alive, to keep it
real, to hold it at arm’s length, is the way of gods and
demons.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And Wolf, hearing this, lifted up his worm’s-voice
within that mocker and cried out upon its lewd clay-cold
cunning.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There is no reality but what the mind fashions out
of itself. There is nothing but a mirror opposite a mirror,
and a round crystal opposite a round crystal, and a
sky in water opposite water in a sky.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ho! Ho! You worm of my folly,” laughed the hollow
skull. “I am alive still, though I am dead; and you are
dead, though you’re alive. For life is beyond your mirrors
and your waters. It’s at the bottom of your pond; it’s
in the body of your sun; it’s in the dust of your star-spaces;
it’s in the eyes of weasels and the noses of rats
and the pricks of nettles and the tongues of vipers and the
spawn of frogs and the slime of snails. Life’s in <span class='it'>me</span> still,
you worm of my folly, and girls’ flesh is sweet for
ever and ever; and honey is sticky and tears are salt
and yellow-hammers’ eggs have mischievous crooked
scrawls!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf saw himself rising erect upon his tail as he heard
these words.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You lie to yourself, Truepenny! You lie with the old,
hot, shuffling, fever-smitten lie. It’s the foam-bubbles of
your life-mania that you think so real. They’re no more
real than the dreams of the plantains that grow over
your grave!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A movement of Gerda, though she still remained
asleep, broke up the current of his fancies, and he pulled
out his watch.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Damn! It was time for him to start now, if he was
to reach Mr. Urquhart’s house at the accustomed hour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I won’t have tea with <span class='it'>him</span>,” he thought. “I’ll have
tea at the Otters’. Then I’ll find out if Mattie and Olwen
are still all right there.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rose to his feet. From the hushed indrawn beauty
of the hour he gathered up new strength for the burden
of human fate he seemed destined to carry.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Fragment by fragment he collected what was over
from their lunch and put it back in Gerda’s basket, prodding
into the soft earth of a mole-hill, with the end of
his stick, the bits of paper in which those things had
been tied up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then, stretching out his arms and seizing with each
hand a branch of a young sycamore, he swung these two
pliant limbs backwards and forwards, while his gaze
concentrated itself upon the girl at his feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But as he did this the transparency ebbed away from
the vision of his days, and a fantastic doubt assailed him.
Was Gerda’s sleep so deep and happy because of some
occult affinity between her nerves and this historic hill?</p>

<p class='pindent'>As if to give substance to his fancy, the girl rolled
over languidly at that moment and lay prone, burying
both her outstretched hands in the soft moss. A deep,
shuddering sigh passed through her; and her body visibly
quivered under her thin dress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Was there some strange non-human eroticism, he wondered,
in this contact between the heathen soil and that
sleeping figure? He smiled to himself and then frowned
uneasily. He began to feel obscurely piqued by the girl’s
remoteness and inaccessibility. He felt as if he were actually
looking on at some legendary encounter between
the body of Gerda and the crafty super-human desire of
some earth-god. He began to feel an insidious jealousy
of Poll’s Camp, an obstinate hostility to its mossy curves
and grassy hollows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Very well!” he thought, in his fantastic irritation, as
if he actually beheld his companion in the very arms
of the hill-god. “If she draws away from me, I can draw
away from her!” And his eyes, wandering to the roofs
of the town, settled on that quarter where he knew the
roof of the book-shop to be. He tightened his hold upon
the two saplings; and inhaling deeply that hushed, warm
air, he mentally swept off the roof of Christie’s house,
and lifting the wraith-image of her high into the clouds—he
never visualized Christie’s actual appearance in any
of these cerebral excursions—he whirled her away with
him towards that lonely cone-shaped hill, rising out of
the plain, that he knew to be Glastonbury.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a queer dalliance of the mind that he indulged
in just then; for he felt that this airy wraith, that was
Christie Malakite, was in some way the child of that
mystical plain down there, that “chess-board of King
Arthur”; whereas the girl at his feet was in league with
whatever more remote and more heathen powers had
dominated this embattled hill. King Arthur’s strangely
involved personality, with the great Merlin at his side,
was associated with both. But Christie’s “Arthur” belonged
to Glastonbury; Gerda’s, to a far earlier time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s mind now began analyzing in a more rational
manner this difference between the hill he stood upon
and the landscape stretched out before him. “It must be,”
he thought, “that this mass of earth is a far older portion
of the planet’s surface than the plain beneath it.
Even if its magnetism is purely chemical and free from
anything that reverts to the old religions, it may very
well exercise a definite effect upon human nerves! The
plain must, within measurable years, have been covered
by the sea. Where those elm-trees now grow there must
have been shells and sand and swaying seaweeds and
great sea-sponges and voyaging shoals of fish. And this
recent emerging from the ocean cannot but have given
a certain chastened quality, like the quality of old mediæval
pictures, to these ‘chess-board fields.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stared, frowning intently, at the curves and hollows
of Poll’s Camp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How many men,” he wondered, “since the black
cormorants and foolish guillemots screamed around these
escarpments, have stood still, as I am doing now, and
wrestled with the secret of this promontory?” Did any
of the serfs of Arthur, or of Merlin the magician, lean
here upon their spades and let their souls sink down and
down, into motions of primal matter older than any
gods? Did any of the Roman legionaries, stark and
stoical, making of this hill “a sacred place” for some
strange new cult of Mithras, forget both Mithras and
Apollo under this terrestrial magnetism—this power that
already was spreading abroad its influence long before
Saturn was born of Uranus?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Poll’s Camp is heathen through and through,” he
thought; “and even if the old gods never existed, there’s
a power here that in some queer way .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. perhaps just
chemically .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. is at once bewildering and hostile to
me. But the valley .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. this unobtrusive, chastened valley
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. like some immense sad-coloured flower floating
upon hidden water .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. oh, it is the thing I love best
of all!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He released the two pliable sycamore-branches and let
his hands sink down; while the thick, cool leaves of the
young trees, so resilient and sturdy on their smooth
purplish stalks, flapped against his forehead.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The spirit of this hill escapes me,” he thought. “I
have an inkling that it is even now watching me with
definite malignity. But I can’t understand the nature of
what it threatens. There are powers here .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. powers
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. though, by God! they may be only chemical. But
what is chemical? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned his eyes almost petulantly to the southwestern
limits of the valley, to where Leo’s Hill and
Nevilton Hill broke the level expanse.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Those hills are not like this one,” he thought; “and
as for Glastonbury, it’s like the pollen-bearing pistil of
the whole lotus-vale! But this place .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. on my soul, it
has something about it that makes me think of Mr. Urquhart.
It’s watching me. And I believe at this moment it
is making love to Gerda!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He sighed and picked up his hat and oak-stick.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must wake Gerda and be off,” he said to himself.
“I shall be late as it is.”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap16'>A GAME OF BOWLS</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was compelled that particular afternoon
to walk a good deal faster than his wont, to reach the
manor-house of King’s Barton in time for his daily
labour. But his work itself was, when he did settle down
to it, a great deal pleasanter than usual, owing to the
absence of Mr. Urquhart from the scene.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found it extremely agreeable to sit at leisure in
that escutcheoned window, one of whose smaller panes
opened to the outside air upon such easy and such
smoothly-worked hinges as made it a pleasure to open
it or shut it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The purple asters and blue lobelia-borders in the
flower-beds below, had gathered to themselves a much
more autumnal atmosphere than when he last observed
them. There were more fallen leaves; and upon them,
as well as upon the dark velvety grass, he fancied that
he could discern the moisture of last night’s dew, giving
them that peculiar look for which he had been craving.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The actual work he was engaged on lent itself to the
breathless peacefulness of that grey afternoon. He had
to take the gnomic commentaries and floating fragments
of wicked gossip gathered together by his employer, and
translate them into a style that had at least some beauty
of its own. This style had been his own contribution to
the book; and though it had been evoked under external
pressure, and in a sense had been a <span class='it'>tour de force</span>, it was
in its essence the expression of Wolf’s own soul—the
only purely æsthetic expression that Destiny had ever
permitted to his deeper nature.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The further he advanced with his book the more interested
he became in this aspect of it. He spent hours
revising the earlier chapters, written before this style of
his had established itself; and he came to value these
elaborated pages as things that were precious in themselves—precious
independently of whether they were ever
printed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Cerne Giant was now the subject of his efforts;
and his first two renderings seemed to him hopelessly
below the level of the rest of his writing.</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='pindent'>“She had sat on the knees of the Cerne Giant in her youth,
and Sir Walter, robbed of the delectation of prolonged seduction,
turned, it seems, in infinite weariness, to the more ambiguous
tastes that procured him his famous infamy.”</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>He put his pen through this and wrote in its place:</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='pindent'>“Those long, hot summer afternoons spent by her in gathering
devil’s-bit and hawkweed in perilous proximity to that troubling
symbol, had seduced her mind long before Sir Walter
seduced her body. It was natural enough, therefore, for this corrupt
rogue to come soon to prefer——”</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>Here he laid down his pen and contemplated once
more the Squire’s notes, which ran as follows:</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='pindent'>“Cerne Giant—real virginity unknown in Dorset—‘cold maids’
a contradiction—Sir Walter’s disgust—His erudition—His platonic
tastes—How he was misunderstood by a lewd parson——”</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>“Good Lord!” said Wolf to himself, “I must be careful
what I’m doing just here. The old demon has changed
his tune. This isn’t garrulous history. This is special
pleading.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He took up his pen, erased the words “natural enough,
therefore, for this corrupt rogue,” and wrote in their
place, “natural enough, therefore, for this baffled idolater
of innocence to become a misogynist and to turn——”
He stopped abruptly, pushed back his manuscript, and
stared out of the window. He would have found it hard to
explain this pause in his work, but a vague consciousness
of the personality of young Redfern took possession
of his mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve never seen a line of that fellow’s writing,” he
thought. “I wonder what <span class='it'>he</span> would have made of this
precious Sir Walter?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The blue lobelias, the dark-green grass-blades leaning
sideways against the edge of the brown mould, as if some
light faun’s-hoof had trodden them down, came to his
consciousness then with such a clear revelation of something
in nature purer than anything in man’s mind, that
he felt a sense of nausea with regard to these lewd
preciosities. What was he doing, to be employed at such
a job?</p>

<p class='pindent'>If the book were ever published, none of his own
stylistic inventions, such as they were, could offset the
general drift of it. And what effect would that drift have?
To which side of the gulf between beauty and the opposite
of beauty would it draw readers?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Like a drop of ice-cold rain, frozen, accursed, timeless,
this abominable doubt fell upon his heart and sank into
its depths. The whole subterranean stream of Wolf’s life-illusion
had been obsessed, as long as he could remember,
by the notion of himself as some kind of a protagonist
in a cosmic struggle. He hated the traditional
terminology for this primordial dualism; and it was out
of his hatred of this, and out of his furtive pride, that
he always opposed, in his dialogues with himself, his
own secret “mythology” to some equally secret “evil”
in the world around him. But because the pressure of
circumstances had made him so dependent on Mr. Urquhart’s
money, it happened that until this actual moment
he had evaded bringing his conscience to bear upon the
man’s book, though he had brought it to bear freely
enough upon the man himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But now—cold, frozen, eternal, malignant—this abominable
doubt fell upon him like an accursed rain .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
drip-drop, drip-drop, drip-drop .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. each drop sinking
out of sight into the dim, unreasoning levels of his being,
where it began poisoning the waters.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How can I struggle with this man when I am exhausting
all my ingenuity in trying to make his book
an immortal work?” Wolf placed the sheets of his manuscript
carefully in order and put a heavy paper-weight
on the top of them. Then he set himself to curse the
obscurity of his universe as he had never done before.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good—evil? Evil—good?” he thought. “Why should
these old dilemmas rise up now and spoil my life, just
as it is rounding itself off into a solid integrity?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He surveyed the great shelves of Mr. Urquhart’s library
much in the same mood as he had recently surveyed the
circumvallation-lines of Poll’s Camp. “Come out of your
grave, you wretched Redfern!” he cried under his breath.
“And let’s hear what <span class='it'>you</span> made of it! Was it the drip-drop
of this infernal indecision that sent you scampering off
to Lenty Pond of an autumn evening? Did you feel a
knot in <span class='it'>your</span> head, tightening, tightening, tightening?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The thought came to him then, “Suppose I gave up
this whole job?” And the image of his mother seeking
refuge with Lord Carfax, of Gerda back again in Torp’s
yard, of himself wandering over the world, far removed
from Christie, rose sickening, ghastly, before him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He lifted the paper-weight from the pile of manuscript.
It had its own interest, this paper-weight—a slab of
alabaster with a silver eagle upon it. He tilted it up and
balanced it sideways, till the eagle looked to him like a
fly on a piece of soap.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Soap?” he thought; and the word put him in mind
of what Mr. Urquhart had said about the transfiguration
of little things by the decision to commit suicide.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At that moment there was a sharp knock at the door,
and Wolf started violently, leaving the paper-weight
upside-down upon his manuscript.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come in!” he cried, in a loud, irritable tone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tall figure of Roger Monk entered and walked
gravely up to him. It had always been a speculation to
Wolf how this great ostler-gardener managed to move
so discreetly across these polished floors. The man moved
up to him now as if he had been a supernatural messenger
walking upon air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I came just to tell you, Mr. Solent, Sir,” said Roger
Monk, “that there’s a bowling-match goin’ on at Farmer’s
Rest. It entered my mind, since Squire’s out to
Lovelace’s tonight, ’twould be a sight you might be sorry
to miss, Mr. Solent, Sir.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where’s Farmer’s Rest?” enquired Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, that’s the village pub, Sir! Haven’t you ever
been into it, Sir? But I expect it’s out of your way. It’s
out of all decent folks’ way, I reckon. ’Tis down Lenty
Lane, Pond Lane, and Dead Badger Lane. ’Tis no great
way; and I’m thinking of going round there myself. So
if it’s no offense, Mr. Solent, Sir, I thought as maybe ye’d
like to have my company.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stopped, and in the manner of the discreet servant
of a wilful master stared impassively at the wall till his
gentleman made his decision.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d like to come with you very much, Roger,” Wolf
replied. “But what about tea? I was thinking of dropping
in at Pond Cottage.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t do that, Sir. Come, as I’m telling ’ee, to Farmer’s
Rest and I’ll see to it myself that Miss Bess’ll give
you as good a cup o’ tea, and a better, too, than ye’d
ever get from that old Dimity’s kitchen. Not but what
things be much more decent-like down there, since Miss
Smith be living with ’em.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How does Dimity put up with Miss Smith, Roger?”
enquired Wolf slily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Past all expectancy, Mr. Solent,” replied the other.
“But she’s a real lady, that young woman, whoever her
Dad were.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, wasn’t Mr. Smith her father, then?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Roger Monk winked slily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There <span class='it'>be</span> as says he weren’t, Sir. But if you don’t
mind, Mr. Solent, we’d best be getting along, down-village.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved towards the door as he spoke, and Wolf got
up and followed him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lenty Lane and Pond Lane were familiar enough,
though under that grey windless sky they assumed the
kind of expression that Wolf always imagined such
places to assume when some disturbing human event
was impending; but Dead Badger Lane led him to completely
new ground. It was narrower than either of the
others and very much overgrown with grass. This grass
grew long and rank on both sides of deep cart-tracks,
and amid its greenness there were patches of scabious
and knapweed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who’s playing in this bowling-match?” Wolf asked,
wondering vaguely what there was about these patches of
country weeds that made him think of a certain dusty
road beyond the railway-station at Weymouth. “Beyond
the backwater it was, too,” he said to himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Malakite from Blacksod, Sir, be playing against
our Mr. Valley.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And I be playing myself, Sir,” the
man added, after a pause, in a deprecatory tone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf prodded the cart-track with his stick, and, unseen
by his companion, pulled down the corners of his
mouth and worked the muscles of his under-jaw.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Whom are you playing against?” enquired Wolf in a
politely negligent tone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man gave him a quick glance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hope ’tis no offense to name the party, Sir, but I be
playing against your Missus’s Dad.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Against Mr. Torp?” cried Wolf, feeling that the situation
in front of him was growing thicker with discomfort
every moment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“None other, Sir. The old gentleman be the best hand
at bowls, when ’ee be sober, if I may say so, that they
have anywhere down these ways. I learned the game myself”—these
last words were spoken with extraordinary
impressiveness—“in the Shires.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Farmer’s Rest turned out to be a small, whitewashed,
thatched cottage, not very well kept up, and displaying
no sign, as far as Wolf could see, of its professional use.
The place was open and they stepped inside.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were confronted by a narrow passageway leading
into a garden at the back; and there, framed by an open
door, he could see the bowling-green, with groups of
grave men moving solemnly across it in their shirt-sleeves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The public bar was on his right, the private parlour
on his left; and into this latter room he was ushered by
the tall gardener.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“One minute, Sir, and I’ll fetch Miss Bess. I expect
some of the other gentlemen will be glad to have a cup
of tea. Her name is Round, Sir, if you don’t mind. Miss
Elizabeth Round.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf sat down and waited. Sure enough, in about five
minutes a pretty young woman, plump and rosy-cheeked,
but in some odd way vacant-looking, brought in a tea-tray
and placed it on the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was completely nonplussed by the personality of
Miss Round. Superficially she looked clean, fresh, amiable,
and a little stupid; but all her movements possessed
a queer, automatic quality that made him slightly uncomfortable.
He couldn’t define it at once; but after
watching her carefully for a short space, he came to the
conclusion that she was like a pretty doll, or a human
mannikin, wound up to perform a given task, but lacking
all interior consciousness of what she was doing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Malakite sends his compliments, Sir,” she said,
“and he hopes to have the honour of a cup of tea with
you in a minute. He’s just finishing his game.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t hurry him. I’ll be all right,” murmured Wolf.
“Is your father the landlord here?” This he added rather
lamely, as she proceeded with rapid movements of her
plump hands to arrange the tea-things on the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Bess nodded. “He’s not Dad,” she replied calmly.
“He’s uncle. Dad’s been gone for years.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Whether she meant that Mr. Round, for reasons of his
own, had bolted, or whether she meant that he was dead,
Wolf could not tell. His interest in Miss Bess was faint;
in her father, dead or alive, fainter still. His heart was
beating at that moment for quite another cause. His
glance, fixed upon the door into the passage, kept visualizing
the bookseller’s grizzled head. His ears strained
themselves to catch the sound of the old man’s voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But for several seconds all he could hear was the
knocking of the bowls against one another on the grass
outside.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he became aware of quite a different sound, a
sound that apparently proceeded from above the ceiling
of the private parlour. He glanced at Miss Bess, and, to
his surprise, she promptly raised a plump finger and
pressed it against her lips.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s uncle,” she whispered. “He’s heard a strange
voice and it’s set him off.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf and Miss Bess both concentrated their attention
upon this new sound. It was a thick human voice, repeating
over and over again the same two syllables.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is he ill? Is he suffering? Don’t let me keep you if
you ought to go up to him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Bess removed her fingers from her mouth and
smiled a little.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, it’s all right <span class='it'>now</span>,” she declared calmly. “It’s
your voice that started him. He knows every noise for
yards and yards round this house. Dogs, cats, pigs,
poultry, pigeons, horses, cattle. There isn’t a sound he
doesn’t know. He’ll know who’s won this match o’ bowls
afore I tells him a thing.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The voice above the ceiling continued its refrain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s how he goes on—sometimes for hours. But us
who knows him takes no stock in <span class='it'>that</span>. Now, if I’d heard
him starting off on God, same as he does sometimes,
you’d have seen me running upstairs like greased lightning!
It’s all as how he gets started. Whichever way he
starts he keeps it up till he’s tired. Funny, isn’t it? But
no one knows what human nature can come to, till ye’ve
seen it and heard it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Does he say ‘God’ over and over again in this same
way?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Bess nodded. “It’s <span class='it'>then</span> I’ve got to run! It’s always
the same. I used to let him do it; but one day they
found him in a ditch, eating frog-spawn. The ditch were
over Lenty-way. I expect you’ve often seen it. It’s where
them mare’s-tails grows. He had to be pulled out. <span class='it'>That</span>
were one of his ‘God’ days.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once more Wolf strained his ears; and, mingled with
the clicking of the bowls outside, came that repeated
“Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus” from above
the ceiling.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’ll go to sleep, present; and by supper-time he’ll be
gay as a lark. It’s our Mr. Valley taught him what to
do. ‘When you feel God coming,’ Mr. Valley said to him,
‘don’t get flustered or anything. Just say “Jesus” and
you’ll go to sleep like a new-born babe!’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s the matter with him?” enquired Wolf. The
girl fetched a blue tea-cosy from the recesses of a cupboard
and pulled it down carefully over the teapot.
Then she raised her eyes and looked straight at her
guest; and for the flicker of a second her brisk, automatic
personality displayed the troubled awareness of a conscious
soul.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Worried,” she said simply. And then, in the old automatic
way: “Excuse me, Sir. There’s someone in the bar.”
And with all the fresh, stupid innocence of her first
entrance upon the scene, she hurried across the passage.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf surveyed the admirable preparations for tea that
lay spread before him. There were two teacups, two
knives, two plates, and two chairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What on earth shall I talk about with the old man?”
he thought. “I wish he’d hurry up. This tea will have
stood much too long.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had not long to wait. There were shuffling steps in
the passage, and the bookseller came in. Wolf rose and
shook him by the hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Just in time, Mr. Malakite,” he said. “I was afraid our
tea would get too strong.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two men sat down opposite each other, and Wolf,
removing the blue cosy, filled both their cups and handed
the bookseller the bread-and-butter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope you’re ahead in your game,” he said emphatically.
“It must be an absorbing game, bowls. It must
be one of the most absorbing of all.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Malakite put down his cup and moved a long,
slender forefinger round its rim.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your father and I had many a game on this green,”
he said, without raising his eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And Wolf looked at Mr. Malakite with as many confused
feelings as he had ever experienced in the presence
of one human head. He thought to himself, “Was the
man ever ashamed of that white beard when he saw himself
in the looking-glass, as he went up to wash his hands
between dusting his books and sneaking into his girl’s
room?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You and my father, Mr. Malakite,” he said in a low
tone, “must have seen quite a lot of each other in those
old days.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“One more cup, if you please, Sir. A lot of each other?
Well—no. He was a gentleman, you see; and I’ve never
been anything but a tradesman. But still .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in a manner
of speaking, we <span class='it'>were</span> friends, I suppose.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He lifted his eyes now, and Wolf was surprised by the
devouring intensity of their gaze. It was a fixed, monomaniacal
intensity, and it seemed addressed to no particular
object. It was impossible to imagine it softening
into tenderness, or abandoned to humour, or melting in
grief. It did not seem adapted to looking into human eyes.
It seemed directed towards some aspect of universal
matter that absorbed and fascinated it. It seemed, so to
speak, to <span class='it'>eat the air</span>. Mr. Malakite himself appeared
apprehensive of the effect of his gaze upon his interlocutor;
for he lowered his eyelids directly his words
were out of his mouth, and once more began following
the rim of his teacup with the tip of his finger.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know that look,” thought Wolf. “I’ve seen it on the
streets in London and I’ve seen it on the esplanade at
Weymouth. It’s like the passion of a miser. It’s horrible,
but it’s not contemptible.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Had you many friends in common?” enquired Wolf;
and as he spoke, he leant across the table, and, without
waiting this time for any request, filled up the old man’s
cup to the very brim and placed the milk-jug at his side.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t stand that finger-game of his!” he said to
himself. “He’ll have to stop doing that if he’s going to
drink his tea.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But not at all! Mr. Malakite bent his furrowed head,
but keeping his gaze discreetly lowered, once more commenced
circling the vessel’s rim with the extreme tip of
his long finger.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Friends in common?” the old man repeated. “You
mean, I suppose, Mr. Solent, to ask whether your father
and I had any peculiarities in common? That’s a natural
question, and if I knew you better I think I could interest
you a good deal in answering it. But we don’t know
each other well enough, Sir .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. not nearly well enough.
Besides”—and once more Wolf got the benefit of that
fixed, monomaniacal gaze—“I don’t approve of exposing
a father to his son. It’s an impiety, an impiety!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf finished his tea in silence after this, and handed
Mr. Malakite a cigarette. When they were both smoking,
and Wolf, at any rate, was enjoying that faint rarification
of human thought, like the distilling of an essence,
which tea-drinking can induce, he asked Mr. Malakite
with grave directness what was the matter with the landlord
of Farmer’s Rest.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The bookseller’s forehead knit in an unpleasant scowl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Been hearing him, I suppose? Nobody bothers about
<span class='it'>him</span>, Mr. Solent. Miss Elizabeth is the boss here, and she
don’t like people who talk too much about family-matters.
Why should she? Round’s <span class='it'>her</span> uncle, not yours
or mine.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The brutality of this remark destroyed in a moment
all the fragrant clarity of Wolf’s after-tea sensations.
He received the sort of shock from it that always made
him seem to himself a priggish fool, devoid of the degree
of humorous toughness which this world requires. At
the same time it stirred up all his ill-balanced impulses
with regard to persecuted people—impulses that led him
to a morbid exaggeration of this particular aspect of
life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He began to indulge in the wildest imaginings about
the “worried” Mr. Round; and he obstinately returned
to the subject.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Has this fellow up there,” he said uneasily, jerking
his thumb towards the ceiling, “lived in King’s Barton
long?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mr. Malakite rose from his chair.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come out and see the game, Sir, won’t you? There are
people everywhere about us whose existence is no affair
of ours. To fuss over them like this clergyman here does
is only to share their disease.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What disease are you talking about, Mr. Malakite?”
asked Wolf, as he followed him into the garden.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sight of the group of men gathered there so disturbed
his attention that he could not be quite sure
whether he caught correctly the malignant mumbling
that issued from his companion’s lips. “The disease of
Life!” was what it sounded like.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A little later, as he watched the bookseller calculating
with exquisite nicety the “bias” of his particular bowl, he
was conscious of a desire not to encounter again for
some while the expression of those deep-sunken eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What <span class='it'>does</span> that look of his make me think of?” he
wondered, as he nodded to the other players and their
absorbed spectators. And it seemed to him that he recalled
a sombre light-ship that he had seen once in Portland
harbour, which every now and then emitted a long, thin
stream of ghastly, livid illumination from the midst of
waters desolate and disturbed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There had apparently been time, while Wolf was having
his tea, for Roger Monk to defeat Mr. Torp; for that
champion, still in his shirt-sleeves, and extremely hot,
was arguing in a plaintive voice with Mr. Valley as to
what he might have done and didn’t do.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf shook hands with Mr. Valley and commiserated
his father-in-law on his defeat. “It’s a wonder I didn’t
lose a lot of money over you,” he said facetiously. “I
backed you to the limit to beat our friend Roger, for the
honour of the family; and now you’ve let us all down,
and the West Country too! Mr. Monk, so he tells me,
comes from the Shires.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shires be damned, Mr. Solent!” said the monument-maker.
“ ’Tweren’t no shires! ’Twere me wone bloody
cussedness. If I’d ’a known then what I do know now,
’twould be he and me”—he nodded in the direction of
Mr. Malakite—“and not he and <span class='it'>him</span>, for this here final.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How is it that <span class='it'>you</span> got knocked out so soon, Valley?”
enquired Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the little clergyman made a sign with his hand,
and advanced a step or two, intent with all his mind and
soul on Roger Monk’s massive wrist and the bowl which
he was poising.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had to content himself, therefore, with drawing
back his father-in-law to a bench under the hedge, where
the game could be watched and Mr. Torp’s lamentations
listened to in comparative ease and comfort.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s wrong with this Mr. Round?” He hadn’t intended
to say anything like this when he searched about
in his mind for a suitable topic; but the words rose to
his lips as if from some inquisitive demon pricking up
its ears in the pit of his stomach.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Can’t forgive ’isself, I reckon, for they things he said
about young Redfern. ’Twere summat o’ that, so folks
do tell I, what stole the heart out o’ that young gentleman
and made ’un turn to the wall. Leastways there were
some folks as told ’un ’twere what he did say, down here,
at Farmer’s Rest bar, that turned that young man’s poor
heart to stone. ’Twould have jostled me wone innards, I
tell ’ee, if any well-thought-of landlord spoke such words
of I.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What did he say about Redfern?” enquired Wolf,
suppressing the absurd image that rose in his mind of
a Mr. Torp lacerated by moral disquietude.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His father-in-law, however, at that moment saw fit to
display a revived interest in the game of bowls.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Look-see!” he cried, tapping Wolf on the knee, and
leaning forward. “By jiggers, if that girt flunkey from
up at House aren’t making Mr. Malakite look like
nothing!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had indeed for some while been admiring the
steady play of the big gardener. The old man opposed
to him seemed on the contrary to be growing less and
less careful of his aim.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Something’s fretting that wold gent, looks so,” went
on Mr. Torp. “Miss Bess been showing her laces to he, in
parlour, like enough! ’Tis a wonderful disposing of
Providence, Mr. Solent, when old men can flutter young
ladies and make their hands fidget. ’Tis not been allowed
to I, such privileges and portions. And yet I be a man, I
reckon, what knows the road royal as well as another!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf’s mind was still hovering about Mr. Round
and his remarkable “worries.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What did this man actually say about Redfern?” he
repeated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Torp turned his head slowly towards him. “It may
be a good world,” he remarked sententiously, “and it
may be a bad world, but <span class='it'>it’s the world</span>; and us has got
to handle ’un with eyes in our heads for landslides. My
job mayn’t be the job <span class='it'>you’d</span> choose. It mayn’t be the job
<span class='it'>I’d</span> choose, if others offered. But it’s my job. And anyone,
Mr. Solent, with a job like mine can’t afford to stir up
trouble among they dead. I were the man who made the
headstone for’n. I ask ’ee, should I go spreading trouble
about thik quiet lad? They said, when his funeral-day
came, that he’d got no relation to mourn for’n. Who,
then, I ask ’ee, Mr. Solent, is to hold their tongue, i’ the
peace of God, about the poor young man, if it bain’t me
wone self, who chipped the stone what covers him?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is it true, when his conscience troubles him, that Mr.
Round wanders about that field where Lenty Pond is?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Never ye mind where ’a wanders, Mr. Solent! Nebuchadnezzar
were more than he; for kings be more
than publicans; and <span class='it'>he</span> went on all fours in’s day.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His father-in-law’s poetic prevarications had begun to
irritate Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wish you’d tell your wife, Mr. Torp,” he burst out,
“not to let Lobbie bathe in that damned pond!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The monument-maker gave a start and opened his
eyes wide. Wolf’s intonation evidently surprised him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He smiled as he answered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>She</span> not let him bathe? She don’t let him do nothing—not
even breathe, I fancy! ’Twould be somebody very
different from our Gerda’s Mummy, Mr. Solent, what
would make Lob Torp bide at whoam. But what ails ’ee,
Sir, to speak with such disturbance of a good Darset duck-pond,
such as I do mind sliding on, winter come winter,
since I were slim as a lath? What’s Lenty Pond done
to thee, Sir? ’Tis no girt place for perch or pike; and
to my belief no wild-geese ever settled on it; but ’tis a
good pond. ’Tis a pond that would drown the likes of
you and me, maybe. But they boys! Why, they’d bathe
in Satan’s spittle and come out sweet. Lenty Pond’s
nothing to Lob Torp, Sir! You can rest peaceful on that.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As Wolf listened to all this, with one eye on the final
defeat of Mr. Malakite, and the other on the doll-like
briskness of Bess Round, who was now bringing out into
the garden more chairs and more tables, he began to be
aware of a very odd fancy, which he found it impossible
to take seriously, and yet impossible to get rid of.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The fancy had to do with Lenty Pond; and the more
he thought of it, the more ridiculously it pressed upon
him. It was as if every single person in these three Dorset
towns were hiding from him something they knew about
Lenty Pond, something that was absurdly simple, that
fitted together with mathematical precision, but to which
he was himself completely blind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He got up from the bench and went across the grass,
with the intention of congratulating Roger Monk on his
victory. On his way, however, and before his approach
was detected by the gardener, round whose tall figure
all the villagers who had been watching the match were
now gathered, he caught sight of Miss Bess ushering
into the garden the two Otter brothers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Towards these two men he directed his steps, leaving
Mr. Torp to join the loquacious group in the centre of
the bowling-green. As he shook hands with the brothers,
he detected Mr. Malakite secretively shuffling off by the
elbow of Miss Bess, who, with a tray of empty bottles,
was returning into the house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That disconcerting feeling, as though the whole of his
life at the present moment were unreal, weighed upon him
still. It hung upon him like a wavering dizziness, as full
of meaningless blotches and sparkles as the glass coffin-lid
of King Æthelwolf in the Abbey.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Even as he was describing to the two Otters the portion
of the bowling-match that he had seen, his eyes remained
fixed on a particularly smooth and delicately
polished bowl, of a dark-chestnut colour, that lay on the
grass close to Darnley’s feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It seemed to him as if he were reading his fate on the
polished surface of this object, a fate laborious, complicated,
burdened, but at the same time rolled and tossed
about at random by many alien hands! Was there <span class='it'>any</span>
portion of his identity, compact, self-contained, weighted
with inward intention, like the “bias” of this bowl?</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he went on talking to the two brothers, he became
aware that a small flower-seed had balanced itself, in its
aimless flight, on the bowl at Darnley’s feet, and he
began to feel as if this flower-seed were tickling the skin
of his mind, and that he couldn’t brush it away. Something
was fretting him; something was teasing him.
What was it?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then quite suddenly he knew what it was. It was the
memory of old Malakite’s obsessed expression—that expression
of concentrated erotic insanity, directed toward
universal matter, as he had caught it from under the
man’s wrinkled forehead across the blue tea-cosy. This,
then, was why he was answering Jason’s remarks in so
perfunctory a manner! Then he gave a quick sigh of
irrepressible relief; for he became aware that the doll-like
young lady was back again at their side, suggesting
that they should all sit down before a ricketty garden-table
upon which she had placed a fresh tray of mugs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This they proceeded to do; and while she was supplying
them with foaming pints of Dorchester ale, he heard
her say to Darnley: “Mr. Malakite’s just traipsed off.
He made his little joke, like he always does, the funny
old man; but anyone could see he weren’t best pleased!
’Tis hard for him, I expect, to be beat like this by a
fellow who, as you might say, is a foreigner in these parts.
He’s been playing on this green, that old gentleman, as
long as I can mind anything, and there be few enough
who’ve got the best of him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She moved away to persuade the winner of the match
and his rustic admirers to gather about another wooden
table, leaving the “gentry” to their own devices.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then it was that Wolf’s mind completely recovered
from its sense of unreality and from its hallucinations
about Lenty Pond. From where he lay in a creaky straw-plaited
chair between Darnley and Jason, he could take
in at his leisure the whole characteristic West Country
scene. There was a relaxed jocularity about the men’s
voices, as they rose in that shadowy garden, between the
tall privet-hedge and the sloping thatched roof, that
seemed to contain within it all the rich apple-juices that
were ripening in the orchards around them, all the cool
sap of the mangelwurzel plants in the neighbouring
fields, the good white heart of billions of ears of plump
wheat-sheaves, awaiting their threshing-day in all the
granaries between Parret and Stour!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sky, as he watched it above that privet-hedge, was
still of the same filmy greyness as when he had sat, some
five or six hours ago, under the sycamore at Poll’s Camp;
but the gathered volume of masculine personalities, as
it surrounded him now—for Miss Bess was the only
woman on the scene, and <span class='it'>her</span> femininity seemed to have
no more weight in it than petticoats on a clothes-line—seemed
fast building up about him a sort of battlemented
watch-tower, from the isolation and protection of which
his days began to fall into a measured, reasonable order,
such as he had not known for many a long week.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That chestnut-coloured polished bowl was still within
his vision on the smooth turf; but at this moment, in
place of giving him a sense of random helplessness, it
gave him a sense of reassured control. In this pleasant
retreat, with the fumes of the Dorchester ale mounting
into his head, he began to feel his hand firm and unbewildered
once more upon his life’s rudder.</p>

<p class='pindent'>These worthy men, with their work behind them,
seemed to have eluded by some secret pressure of their
united force the splash and beat of nature’s chaotic waves.
They seemed to have dragged their “hollow ship” out
of the tide that summer afternoon—up, up, up some
hidden shelving beach, where all agitations were over.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Everything disturbing and confusing sank away out of
sight for Wolf just then. Indeed, his whole life gathered
itself together with lovely inevitableness, as if it were
a well-composed story that he himself, long ago and
time out of mind, had actually composed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And by degrees while he lazily drank his ale and chatted
with Darnley—for Jason had for some unknown reason
become suddenly silent—the old fighting-spirit of his inborn
life-illusion rose strong and upwelling within him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And there came to him the vision of one particular
rock-pool near Weymouth, to which he had once found
his way. He saw the rose-tinged seaweeds sway backwards
and forwards .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. he heard the crying of the
gulls.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Oh, that it were possible to gather together a great
handful of such memories and pour them forth out of his
cupped hands into the brain above that face on the Waterloo
steps! But—but what if there should arrive a day,
when, by the turning of the terrible engines, he himself
should <span class='it'>look like that face</span>, while some other Wolf, drinking
ale on a bowling-green, indulged in benevolent emotions
in a creaky wicker-chair?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Are you sure you couldn’t come back to dinner with
us, Solent?” said Darnley at last, in a pause in the
midst of their rambling conversation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Impossible!” he said, looking at his watch. “It’s seven
o’clock now. As it is, I shall be late for Gerda’s supper.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then he suddenly remembered that Gerda’s last
words to him had been: “Don’t hurry back, Wolf, I like
waiting for you. I like sitting at the window and doing
nothing. That’s what I like best of all!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Those girls of yours will be very annoyed if you don’t
come,” said Jason.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, they don’t expect me, do they? Your mother
doesn’t expect me, does she?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All women,” said Jason, with a chuckle, his spirits
reviving when he saw Wolf’s discomfort and indecision,
“expect all men!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I must come another time,” said Wolf. “I can’t
leave Gerda like that without telling her. But I hope
‘my girls,’ as you call them, are all right? I hope you
don’t find Olwen too much of a handful?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Darnley is the one to give advice. Do you think he’d
better go home, Darnley; or do you think he’d better
come to dinner with us?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He must suit himself,” said Darnley smiling. “I
wouldn’t care about leaving Gerda alone if I were in his
shoes. But then, I’ve never had a Gerda .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and am
never likely to have!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Valley at this point drifted up to their table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve got to be getting back now,” he said. “Are any
of you people coming, or are you going to stay longer?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The three men all rose. “We were just talking of
getting off,” said Darnley. “I suppose we all go the same
way? At the start, anyhow?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He beckoned to Bess Round to come to their table,
and, drawing a small leather purse out of his pocket,
paid for all the drinks they had had except Mr. Valley’s.
Him Roger Monk had already treated and treated well.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf went across the grass and said good-bye to Mr.
Torp and to Roger Monk, congratulating the latter
warmly on his victory.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve never known the old man to play so badly,” said
Monk, with a deprecatory shrug of his shoulders. “That
cup of tea he had with you in the parlour, Sir, must have
gone to his head.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Give me little darter me love, Mr. Solent,” said the
monument-maker. “And you may kiss she, too, if ye be so
minded, from her old Dad. Not that they turns aught
but cold maids’ cheeks to their Dad’s kisses. But that be
all the better for thee, Sir; and ye are more like to mind
me message than if ’t had been any o’ the young gents
here assembled.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Roger Monk’s victory at bowls had been celebrated by
such copious libations that the gardener had no hesitation
now about indulging in a piece of ribaldry from
which in more sober mood he would certainly have refrained.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Young and old is the same to that gender—eh, Mr.
Solent, Sir? That’s what we servants know, maybe, better
than you gentlemen. There’s not a poor one among that
gender, nor a rich one among ’em—eh, Mr. Torp?—that
hasn’t wished themselves in the bed of somebody that
isn’t their law-established.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf went off down Dead Badger Lane side by side
with Jason, while Darnley walked in front of them with
Mr. Valley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That remark of Roger Monk teased Wolf’s mind. The
man had worded it in a coarser, drier, cruder manner
than such a thing would have been worded by a man of
the West Country. The use of the word “gender,” for
instance, “That’s a touch of Sheffield or Birmingham,”
thought Wolf. And perhaps just because of its coarse
wording, the thing hit Wolf with a most unpleasant emphasis.
What <span class='it'>would</span> he feel if there were any serious
cause for his being jealous? What he did feel at that
moment was an actual sense of physical nausea caused
by Roger’s words. It wasn’t only Gerda. That use of the
word “gender” seemed to have stripped the world of a
certain decency that belonged to its inherent skin quite
as much as to its external conventions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He experienced at that moment a wave of positive
hatred for Roger Monk. “He looked as if he might put
his hand on my shoulder or even slap me on the back.
There’s something horrible about a male servant .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
especially a big male servant .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. when he drops his
professional discretion.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I could find it in me to pity
even Mr. Urquhart if this chap <span class='it'>does</span> ever turn on him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His thoughts were jerked back into focus and into the
cart-ruts of Dead Badger Lane by a remark from Jason
Otter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Look at those two, in front there! Your friend Darnley
has no more idea of what Valley’s after, than that
stick of yours has! I suppose <span class='it'>you</span> think that Darnley’s
very clever and very gentlemanly. That’s what most
people think. It’s all his politeness. Look at their two
heads now, bobbing up and down under their hats! I
think cows and sheep are better than human beings.
Nicer, I mean. Cleaner, too. Cleaner and nicer. What’s
wrong with human beings is their minds. Their minds are
filthy. The minds of worms are much nicer. Have you
ever thought about what really goes on in people’s heads?
I suppose not. I never thought you really knew very
much. You’re good at writing histories of a lot of bawdy
idiots; and you’re good at keeping old Urquhart in a
good temper. But I’ve been thinking about you all this
afternoon, Solent, and though you’ll probably abuse me
for telling you the truth, I think you’re a crazy fool.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>By this time it began to dawn upon Wolf that Jason
had no more power of drinking Dorchester ale with impunity
than had his <span class='it'>bête noire</span> Roger Monk. He tried to
distract the poet’s attention from personalities by remarking
on the insubstantiality and ghostliness of the elm-trees
in the hedges. But Jason refused to show any interest in
the beauty of that August night.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your friend Darnley,” he now began again, “believes
in politeness. He thinks he can smooth everything down
by that. He doesn’t know what he’s got against him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What has he got against him?” enquired Wolf, wondering
at the back of his mind what effect upon this
“politeness” the presence of Mattie in Pond Cottage had
been having of late.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The reply of Jason was so violent and so abrupt that
it had an uncanny effect upon the placidity of those
vaporous elm-trees.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s got God against him!” cried the poet. “What he
tries to smooth down are the porcupine-quills of God!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We’d better walk a little faster,” said Wolf. “They’ll
be turning soon, and I’ve got to go the other way.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re always on the walk, Solent. Walking here,
walking there! You’ll walk into a pit one day, with that
stick of yours.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf lifted his voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Darnley!” he shouted. “Valley! Wait a minute, you
two!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He could see the figures in front of him turn and
stand still.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your friends over there will say good-night to you,
Solent. Were you afraid they wouldn’t? They’ll say good-night.
All the world over people say good-night. They
think it does something, I suppose. <span class='it'>I</span> don’t know what it
does!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf could not repress a heavy sigh. For some reason
or other the peculiar nature of this man’s pessimism
began to affect him as if he had been forced, till his
hands were weary, to push away great stalks of deadly
nightshade.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason caught this sigh upon the air, and it seemed to
change his mood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I expect, Solent, you poor old devil, that that young
lady of yours doesn’t cook a good meal for you very
often.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, yes, she does, Otter!” replied Wolf, as jocosely
as he could. “There’s hardly a day we don’t have meat.
But to tell you the truth, I’ve been thinking of giving up
eating that sort of thing ever since Miss Gault talked to
me the other night.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you attend to anything that an ugly old woman
like that says to you? She only wants to stir things up,
because she’s never slept with a man.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The unkindness of those blunt words roused sheer
anger in Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sleeping with people isn’t everything in this world,
Otter! It isn’t even especially wonderful. I should have
thought that being a poet you’d know that, and wouldn’t
go putting such importance on these material accidents!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His anger, as he recognized clearly enough, was due
to the fact that his own erotic feelings were so divided
just then. But the tone of his voice was so vibrant with
irritation, that its electric current conveyed itself to
Jason in a second.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were now quite close upon the others, however;
and there was no time for anything but a swift, bitter,
malicious blow, aimed where the opponent was most vulnerable.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll walk into a material accident that’ll stir <span class='it'>your</span>
quills, master,” the poet growled, “though you <span class='it'>do</span> think
yourself a sort of superior being going about among
ordinary people. <span class='it'>You’ll</span> walk into the wood where they
pick up horns .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. clever though you may be!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The altercation subsided as swiftly as it had risen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I didn’t want to lose sight of you,” said Wolf, “because
our ways divide in a minute. I wish you’d won that
match, Valley, instead of Monk. I can’t tell why, but
there was something about Monk that annoyed me this
afternoon. Perhaps servants are always annoying when
they’re neither one thing nor the other.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope you didn’t bring <span class='it'>me</span> into your quarrel,” said
Jason Otter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m not as good as any of them,” replied Mr. Valley.
“Even Torp is better than I am. I never allow enough
room for the swing of the bias.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The four men walked on together and soon reached
the spot where Dead Badger Lane joined Pond Lane.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, good-night,” said Wolf. “You and I will be
seeing each other on Monday, eh, Darnley? Won’t you
come back to lunch with me then? I’ll tell Gerda if you
will; and we’ll celebrate the beginning of term with some
sort of feast.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t get anything out of the way for me, Wolf,” the
other replied. “You know what I’m like—the most irritating
kind of guest. But I’d love to come. It’ll make
Monday less of a burden to look forward to.” He
stopped short and then suddenly added. “If it wouldn’t
be a bother to Gerda, I wish you’d really make it a bit
of an occasion and ask little Christie? I’ve had an idea
for the last few weeks .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in fact since Olwen came to
us .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that she wanted cheering up. But don’t say anything
if it would be too much for Gerda.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But, Darnley .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you and I know .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. everyone
knows .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that Christie never goes out anywhere.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ask her, my dear man, that’s all! I daresay she won’t
come, but ask her!” He paused for a second. “Everyone
likes to be asked,” he added gravely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hee! Hee! Hee!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf swung round. It was Jason chuckling like a goblin
in the darkness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mr. Valley threw in his word before the electric
current of irritation that still connected the two men’s
minds had time to explode.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s see,” said Mr. Valley. “It’s Friday today, isn’t
it? Don’t forget, all of you, that next Wednesday is our
School-Treat. It begins at two and goes on till seven.
The Squire always comes after tea to watch the sports;
so I shall expect <span class='it'>you</span> with him, Solent. But tell Gerda I
want her to come too. Lobbie will be there, and our
friend Weevil’s sure to come.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A muffled chuckle became audible.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s the matter with you, Jason?” expostulated
Darnley. “We all enjoy Valley’s school-treats. Are you
going to have the Kingsbury band over here again?” he
added, turning to the clergyman. “What a time we had
last year! They wouldn’t stop, Solent, until it was pitch-dark.
When we did get ’em off, they played the Kingsbury
jig out there in Lenty Lane, till Roger Monk hit
the drummer into the ditch.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It was honest of him to do that,” said Jason. “We all
know why these lecherous young men want the Kingsbury
jig. It would be a good thing if your friend Solent
used his stick for these young dogs, instead of boasting
how many miles he can walk.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I’m going to walk now, anyway,” broke in
Wolf, making a violent effort to keep his temper. “Good-night,
Valley! Good-night Darnley! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found it impossible to think of anything, either
good or bad, except imaginary retorts to Jason, as he
made his way westward through that hushed night. The
mere fact that Jason had the power to annoy him so
much increased his aggravation; and his inability to lay
his finger on the exact nature of this power added the
last sharp prod to his irritated spirit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wonder if I <span class='it'>am</span> the conceited fool he thinks me?
Well! I don’t care if I am. I have my ‘mythology,’ anyway.
He’s got the terrible instincts of a child in these
things,” his thoughts ran on. “He’s so appallingly direct.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He meditated for about a quarter of an hour upon
Jason’s personality; while the man’s taunt about his
fondness for walking and his fondness for his stick took
the heart out of every stride he made.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What really rouses me,” he thought presently, “is
his <span class='it'>desire</span> to annoy. People can get angry with anyone
and say outrageous things. But this is different. He
<span class='it'>wants</span> to make me feel a fool. He <span class='it'>wants</span> to take the life
out of my life.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then Wolf set himself to wonder as to why it was
that his mysterious psychic struggle with the Squire left
him so free from personal hostility; while in the case
of Jason he actually felt a longing to be wrestling with
him in that very ditch into which he had said it was
“honest” of Monk to hit the Kingsbury drummer!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s because he knows by some childish instinct just
where my life-illusion is weakest. It’s because he sees
this weak spot, like a raw scratch in the hide of a bear
tied to a pole, and it somehow gets on his nerves, so that
he wants to poke at it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>With this hypothesis in his mind he advanced yet another
quarter of a mile between the high hedges, where
great bunches of old-man’s-beard made large whitish
blurs against the darkness. The trunks of the elms looked
now, as he passed them by, as if they were composed of a
vaporous stuff that was absolutely liquid. But he hated
to see this particular effect, because it made him think
of his recent attempts to distract Jason from poking at
the spot in his life’s conceit where the skin was so
tender.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>That</span> is what it is,” he thought. Jason has deliberately
stripped himself of every consolatory self-protective
skin. He must see life continually as we others only see
it when our life-illusions are broken through. The point
is, “<span class='it'>is</span> life what Jason sees, or is it what <span class='it'>we</span> see?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Trailing his oak-stick now, instead of prodding the
ground with it, Wolf lurched forward in that fluid grey-coloured
darkness, as if he’d been some forlorn Homeric
ghost whose body had been left unburied.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It <span class='it'>can’t</span> be as he sees it,” he thought, “except to him
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. except to him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He now stood stock-still, his stick just held, but no
more than just held, from falling to the ground.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I refuse to believe,” he said to himself, “and I never
will believe, until the day Nature kills me, that there’s
such a thing as ‘reality,’ apart from the mind that looks
at it! Jason’s stripping himself bare is <span class='it'>his</span> way .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
that’s all .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what he sees when he’s like that is no
less of an illusion than what I see when I’m plastered
with armour. The ‘thing in itself’ is as fluid and malleable
as these trees .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’m a sharded beetle and he’s
one of those naked little green things that live in the
centre of cuckoo-spit!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This comparison cheered Wolf’s mind a good deal;
and his fingers tightened once more upon the handle of
his stick. “These trees, this old-man’s-beard, these dark
ditch-plants .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. they all see what they’ve the nature to
see.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. No living thing has ever seen reality as it is
in itself. By God! there’s probably nothing to see, when
you come to that!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He heard at that moment a slight, dry rustling in the
grass by the side of the road. Inquisitive to know what
it was, he went over, and, stooping down, fumbled with
his hand among the entangled weeds. A scent of camomile
hit his nostrils; but then—with an exclamation of
distress—he drew his hand away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Damn!” he exclaimed. “Thorns!” And he thought
vaguely, “How odd that there should be a bramble-bush
so low down!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once more he heard the rustling; and once more,
though with more caution, he stretched out his hand.
This time he knew what it was; and repressing an instinct
to hook the hedgehog with the handle of his stick
and drag it out into the road, he straightened his own
back and walked on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Another version of reality!” he said to himself. “And
a bit more armoured even than mine!” And then he remembered
what Jason had said with regard to the prickly
quills of God. “I must tell him about this hedgehog,” he
thought. “It’s just the sort of thing that’ll please him,
especially as it’s made my finger bleed.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The notion of communicating this occurrence with
self-depreciatory humour to the “Slow-Worm of Lenty”
completed his restoration to good spirits. By the little
device of seeing himself in a humorous and yet not in a
ridiculous light, he crossed the moat that separated him
from his accustomed stronghold, and pulled up the drawbridge
after him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll tell him about the hedgehog on Wednesday,” he
thought, “when I meet him at the school-treat.” And
thinking of Jason’s goblinish laughter when he should
be telling him the tale, Wolf entirely forgot the
sensations he had recently received from that same
sound.</p>

<p class='pindent'>With a mind once more adjusted and fortified to deal
with existence, he advanced rapidly towards the outskirts
of Blacksod. He knew every mark, every sign of
the way as he came along. In a darkness far deeper than
this darkness he would have known them, those grotesque
and insignificant little things that arrest a person’s attention
for so many unknown reasons, as he follows a
familiar road.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But all at once Wolf thought vividly, sharply, disturbingly
of Mr. Malakite.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope I’m not going to overtake him!” he said to
himself; and then, before this hope was fully registered
in his conscious brain, there in the dimness, standing as
if she were waiting for him, was Christie herself!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I knew your step. I knew the tap of your stick,” she
said hurriedly. “I haven’t been here very long. Father
came back and told me he’d had tea with you and then
went off to get supper in the town; for he knew I hadn’t
anything for him in the house.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She spoke hurriedly, but quite calmly; and all the
while she was speaking, she held one of Wolf’s hands
tightly with one of her own, and kept rubbing his
knuckles with her other hand, as if she were rubbing out
some stain left by Time itself, some imprint which the
days that had passed since they had last seen each other
had left there.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you realize,” he said, “that two seconds before
I saw you I thought suddenly of your father? That shows
something, doesn’t it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve been thinking of him, and of you too, Wolf, all
the afternoon. When he told me you were watching that
game of bowls, I said to myself in a flash, ‘I’ll go out and
meet Wolf coming back!’—and you see I did meet you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She spoke with a wavering happiness that seemed to
be lifting the syllables of her voice up and down on the
darkness as the undulations of a full-brimmed tide might
lift a drifting boat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s find a place to sit down for a minute,” said
Wolf. “I can’t realize I’ve got you, when we’re just standing
up like this.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He tightened his clasp upon her hand and led her to
the hedge. A mass of vague, dark umbrageousness confronted
them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stop!” he whispered, “while I see if there’s a ditch.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He advanced slowly, feeling with his stick among the
hemlocks and dock-leaves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There’s no water, anyway,” he said, stepping down
among the obscure rank-scented growths. “Wait a second,”
he cried, “I believe we can get up over this.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt about with his free hand. He could just detect
the faint outlines of the branches of some small tree or
shrub. It turned out—well did he know that acrid mind-cleansing
pungency in his nostrils!—to be an elder-bush;
and he pulled himself up by its brittle stalks till he attained
the summit of the hedge.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on! Catch hold!” he cried triumphantly, securing
a firm position for himself and stretching out the
handle of his stick towards her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It took her a second or two of struggling amid the
mass of weeds and of fumbling with upraised arm, before
she reached the extended support. But when once she
felt it between her fingers she clung tight with both
hands, and he soon pulled her up beside him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They found themselves, by a lucky chance, in a wheat-field
that had been cut but not yet carried; and after a
step or two across the stubble, they sank down with a
mutual cry of satisfaction against the side of a shock of
corn.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The weight of the immense vaporous summer darkness
covered them there like a waveless ocean. They floated
there upon a cool, yielding darkness that had neither substance
nor shape, a darkness full of a faint fragrance
that was the sweetness neither of clover nor of poppies
nor of corn nor of grass, but was rather the breath of the
great terrestrial orb itself, a dark, interior, outflowing
sweetness between vast-rocking waves of air, where
firmament bent down to firmament, and space rose up to
meet space.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He kept fast hold of her hand; and her fingers seemed
still cold and stiff and impassive, just as they had done
when he first took them in the road. She did not bend
her head towards him as they sat side by side, nor
did he make the least movement to put his arm round
her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had sunk a little lower in the corn-shock than
she, so that their heads were exactly level; and to any
inquisitive owl or nightjar hovering across that stubble-field
they must have appeared like two well-constructed
scarecrows, good enough to frighten the silly daylight
rooks, but quite negligible and harmless to all more
sagacious nocturnal eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“When I’m with you like this,” said Wolf, “I feel as
if I’d stripped my mind clean off my spirit; pulled it
off as I might pull off my vest when I go to bed! I feel
as if I could actually see my mind now, like that terrible
flayed skin in the ‘Last Judgement,’ lying there on the
ground. I can see the rents in it and the stains on it and
all the insane zigzag creases!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I knew I should meet you tonight,” said Christie,
“just as I really knew, though I wouldn’t admit I knew,
that you’d come to me that day of the fair. I felt it would
be like this the moment my father left the shop. Do you
think it’s being the daughter of my mother that gives me
these feelings, or do you think every girl who’s in love
has them sometimes?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The question fell like a ripple of the very sweetness
of the night over Wolf’s soul, but he went on thinking
aloud without replying.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The odd thing is that when I’m away from you I can
hardly call up your face. Mother’s face and Gerda’s face
I know like two books; but it’s as if I carried your
identity so close to me that I couldn’t see a single expression
of it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I feel unreal,” said Christie. “That’s how I feel—unreal.
I’ve told myself stories about a lover since I was
little. But after Olwen was born—oh, and before that,
too—my life was so crushed and inert that I seemed to
look at everything from some point outside of myself—as
if my mind had been a cold, hard, inert mirror, reflecting
what was there, but not feeling anything. But
now I’ve known you it’s been all different. My mind has
got in touch again. I was a mere husk or shell all those
miserable years—without a heart at all. But now the
husk has come to life, and my heart with it. But sometimes
I think my heart’s still partly dead.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m perfectly satisfied with how your heart is,” Wolf
threw in. “Alive or dead, I’ve got it now, and I’m never
going to let it go! What’s so strange is that I don’t
idealize you one bit; and I don’t think you idealize me
either. I think it’s wonderful how we accept each other
just as we are.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Whether it’s being my mother’s daughter or not,”
said Christie, “it’s a great comfort to me to have the feelings
I have about what you’re doing or where you are.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I think if anything happened to you I should
know.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wonder what it really is in us,” said Wolf, “that
makes us so happy as we are? All other lovers in our
position I know very well would be desperate to make
love, to live together, to have a child; but here we are,
in this field, perfectly content just to be side by side.
<span class='it'>You</span> don’t want anything more than this, Christie, do
you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t know, Wolf, that I’ll always feel as I do now.
How can I know? But certainly tonight I don’t want
anything else.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She stopped; and then, after a little pause, her voice
began again in the darkness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But you don’t think, Wolf”—her tone had in it now
a certain half-humorous dismay—“that what we feel for
each other could ever be called ‘Platonic,’ do you? I
don’t know .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. perhaps it’s because the word’s been so
misused .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but I’ve always had such an aversion to
that idea. The mere possibility of its being applied to
the mysterious feeling between us, just because we don’t
want what people usually do who are in love, reduces
everything for me in some way .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. do you know what
I mean?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ay, Christie! Christie!” he cried. “How my father
would chuckle if he heard those words of yours! You
know how <span class='it'>he</span> would regard us and the way we behave?
As nothing less than stark, staring mad! I’m damned if
<span class='it'>I</span> know what ‘Platonic’ does mean .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but I’m rather
inclined .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to think .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to think .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that our way
of dealing .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. with things .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. with our feeling for
each other .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. is much more mediæval than Platonic.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mediæval, Wolf?” protested Christie.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t be cross with me. I know I’m absurd. I suppose
I’m more of a slave to philosophical <span class='it'>phrases</span> than anyone
in the whole of England! I love the sound of them.
They have something .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a sort of magic .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I don’t
know what .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that makes life rich and exciting to me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I know what you mean, Wolf!” cried Christie.
“That’s why I’ve loved reading those books in our shop
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. especially Leibnitz and Hegel. I’ve never been able
to follow their real meaning, I suppose; but all the same
it’s been a great satisfaction to me to read them.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t think it’s pedantry or priggishness in either
of us,” Wolf continued. “I think we’re thrilled by the
weight of history that lies behind each one of these
phrases. It isn’t just the word itself, or just its immediate
meaning. It’s a long, trailing margin of human sensations,
life by life, century by century, that gives us this
peculiar thrill. Don’t you think so, Christie?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What I was going to say,” the girl murmured, “was
that since I’ve known you I haven’t cared so much for
these philosophical books.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Nonsense!” he muttered. But once more there floated
over him an undulating tide of happiness that made the
mere tone of her voice seem to him like those fluctuating
wine-dark shadows on the deep sea, that suggest the presence
of cool-swaying fields of submerged seaweeds lying
beneath the water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know they’re absurd .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. these phrases .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” he
went on. “Words like ‘pluralism’ and ‘dualism’ and
‘monism.’ But what they make me think of is just a particular
class of vague, delicious, physical sensations!
And it’s the idea of there having been feelings like these,
in far-off, long-buried human nerves, that pleases us
both so much. It makes life seem so thick and rich and
complicated, if you know what I mean?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were both silent, and presently she struggled
stiffly to her feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And now, Wolf dear,” she said, “I’m sure it’s time
we went on! I don’t like being the one to say it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or
being the one to interrupt our thoughts .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but Father
will be back, and Gerda will be expecting you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rose to his feet, too, and they stood awkwardly
there, side by side in that windless darkness. Wolf had
the feeling for one second as if the world had completely
passed them by .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. gone on its way and forgotten
them .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so that not a soul knew they existed except
themselves. As the shadow of a solitary bird on lonely
sands answers the form of the bird’s flying, so did
he feel at that moment that his spirit answered her
spirit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the moment passed quickly. A vague, troubling
remembrance of that “yellow bracken” down by the Lunt
rose up suddenly without cause. “Gerda must be thinking
of me,” he said to himself. And as this thought came
into his head he couldn’t resist a savage, secret jibing at
his own treachery. “I wonder,” he thought, “what Jason
would say if he knew everything!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl’s figure, close to him as it was, seemed like
a pillar of mist. “It’s love-making,” he thought, “just
the relief of love-making, that saves a person’s touchy
mind from these morbid thoughts. But Christie doesn’t
depend on that, any more than I do. What <span class='it'>would</span> Jason
say if he saw us now?” And then there came upon him
a curious sense of shame that his mind had the power
of wandering so far. “Is <span class='it'>her</span> mind wandering too?” he
thought. “What is going on in <span class='it'>her</span> mind?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He spoke to her then .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to that blur that was her
face in the darkness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“As long as we see each other like this, it’ll go on
being all right, won’t it, Christie?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her voice replied to his voice with a sound that might
have been a whisper out of his own heart or might have
been a cry from the other side of the world.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But it’s hard now. It’s hard when it ends,” she murmured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We might never have met at all,” he said resolutely.
“We’ve had all we wanted tonight. It’s been as if all the
noises of the world had blent into one, and then quite
died away. Listen, Christie, there’s not a stir or movement.
It’s silence like this that you and I have always
wanted .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. all our lives.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But it’s hard when it ends,” she repeated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We mustn’t think of that,” he said. “Our thoughts
will always be able to find this silence. We shall always
be able to reach each other with our thoughts, wherever
we are. Don’t you feel like that, Christie?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I try to,” she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You <span class='it'>do</span>. No one else except you could answer a person’s
thoughts before they’ve been spoken! You <span class='it'>must</span>
know, Christie, how I go muttering on and on to you,
in my heart, day and night, telling you every single feeling
I have?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I tell you things too, Wolf. I talk to you, too, sometimes
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but still, but still .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her voice broke in a light sigh that floated away
into the stubble, fainter than the falling of a feather.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know,” he repeated obstinately. “But don’t let’s be
ungrateful to the gods, Christie. Think, how easy for us
never to have met at all! Think, how I might have gone
on with my life in London, you with your life in Blacksod!
But now it’s all different. And there really <span class='it'>is</span> a
sense .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. don’t you see, Christie? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in which by
just knowing each other and being as we are we’ve got
outside Time and outside Space! We’ve got into a region
where all this——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stop, Wolf, stop!” the girl cried. “I can’t bear it now.
I tell you I can’t——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved towards her, seeking to touch her; but she
drew away from him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Forgive me!” she said, in a low, quiet voice. “It isn’t
that I don’t understand you. I feel all those things. It’s
only that .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. at the end .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. when I’ve got to leave
you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that all this seems .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I mean doesn’t
seem .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The gentleness of her tone softened the reproach, if
reproach there was; and Wolf was conscious of nothing
but an obscure rebellion within him against this mysterious
pride in them both which made it so hard for him
to risk the relief of the least caress. It was his turn to
sigh now—a heavier sigh than hers—and in a second she
caught his change of mood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I love you so much, Wolf,” she said. “I wouldn’t hurt
you for anything. It’s what I feel for you that makes it
so hard when you’ve got to go and I’ve got to go. And I
know what you mean .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I <span class='it'>do</span> know what you mean
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. about .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. about our thoughts!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As she spoke she moved towards him a little in the
darkness. It was an almost imperceptible movement;
but it was enough to send a perilous stab of tenderness
through his nerves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Christie, oh, Christie .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” he murmured, involuntarily
starting towards her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But she had already gathered her cloak about her and
held it tightly with one hand under her chin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all right, Wolf! It’s all right!” she said quickly,
turning as if with a swift impulse for flight towards the
hedge.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It would be mad now, I suppose,” he thought, as he
followed her through the entangled branches.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Half-an-hour later, and he was walking with a rapid,
preoccupied step along the lighted pavement of the
Blacksod High Street. His head was so full of Christie,
as he strode along, that the people he passed were as
much phantoms to him as had been the elm-trees on the
road from King’s Barton.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie had agreed to come on Monday. That was
what he was thinking about now; and it was an imaginary
dialogue with Gerda, dealing with this project, that
he was now occupied in rehearsing, sentence by sentence,
as he hurried along.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If she refuses, she refuses!” he thought. “I
shan’t press her. I’ll just have to tell them the thing’s
off.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had just reached the point, close to the marketplace,
where Preston Lane debouched from the High
Street, when he encountered, without any warning of his
approach, for the pavement was crowded, the lean
Panurge-like figure of Bob Weevil, hurrying along in a
new straw-hat and new flannel trousers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hullo!” said the young grocer, with a shrinking,
startled movement; and then he gave a furtive glance
around him, as if to ensure public protection from a
possible outburst of physical violence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, it’s you, is it, Bob?” said Wolf. “Where are <span class='it'>you</span>
going so fast?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Weevil stopped and gazed at him with screwed-up
eyelids, as he shook him by the hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Home,” he announced, in a loud, unpleasant voice.
“Home to Dad. ‘Little Bobbie’s Best at Home,’ ” he went
on. “Where’ve <span class='it'>you</span> been? Pursuing the Necessary over
at Barton?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The forced grin that animated the lad’s features as
he indulged in these pleasantries was so obviously embarrassed
and uneasy, that Wolf became instantaneously
suspicious. Every word of Jason’s innuendoes returned
to his mind. There also returned to him that still more
sinister hint whispered by the poet on the day of the
snatching away of Mukalog.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where have <span class='it'>you</span> been?” he asked abruptly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He did his best to give his voice a casual tone; but
the effect of his question upon Mr. Weevil showed that
this effort was unsuccessful.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re not a detective, are you?” jeered the young
man, in a boisterously insolent manner. “ ‘Little Bobbie’s
Best at Home,’ ” he repeated. “Do you know that song?
I’ll give you the rest of it some day.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, good-night to you!” rapped out Wolf,
brusquely and almost rudely. “I’ve had a long day.
Good-night to you; and don’t stay in the water so long
the next time you bathe in Lenty Pond!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved off at that, grimly entertained, in spite of
his agitation, by the manner in which the young man’s
eyes and mouth opened at the tone of this remark.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s been with Gerda,” he thought, as he hurried on.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap17'>“THIS IS REALITY”</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>As soon as he reached Preston Lane, Wolf looked
at his watch under the first of the three lamp-posts which
were all the illumination that Blacksod had bestowed on
that humble district. It was a quarter past nine. He must
have been more than an hour in the cornfield; for he had
left the bowling-green at seven.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s been with Gerda.” This single thought had
brought him from the centre of the town to where he now
stood, without consciousness of anything in the world
except one solitary fish’s eye—glazed and staring—that
he had caught a glimpse of on a gas-lit counter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was too staggered even to experience surprise at
his unexpected feelings. No alert self-watchful demon in
him cried out, “What is this?” or “What does <span class='it'>this</span>
mean?” He just suffered; and his suffering was such a
completely new thing to him that he had no mental apparatus
ready with which to deal with it. He was like
a man who all his life had stalked leopards, suddenly
confronted by a charging rhinoceros! All the blood that
was in him seemed to have rushed with blind, irrational
violence to a portion of his nervous system which he had
supposed atrophied and callous. Vividly he recalled
Jason’s warning to him in the road by the churchyard.
“Those people must have pushed him to this,” he thought.
“Not very nice,” he thought, “to think of the water-rat
boasting up there with them and telling tales about her!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stood stock-still beneath the lamp-post. He felt as
though a mob of Urquharts and Jasons had burst into
the inmost sanctuary of his feelings—of his inarticulate
physical feelings—and were jeering at them. He felt as
though he had been stripped naked—as though he had
become a laughing-stock to the human race. These were
just the things—these physical feelings—that in his
pride he had hidden from everyone. And now they were
held up to derision, and he himself with them! He walked
slowly across the road and then stopped and looked
about him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Everything was quiet. Most of the windows of those
neat little houses displayed shaded gas-jets between the
muslin curtains. From where he stood, the dark outline
of the pig-dealer’s shed was a small huddled blackness
against the tall ash-tree further on. Over the top of the
shadowy hedge came a faint smell of cattle-trampled
grass, a poor antidote to the manure-drain whose stench
soon swallowed it up. His own house was still two or
three doors off. He could see a thin stream of light
emerging from its upper window. Gerda was in her bedroom,
then—in her bedroom at a quarter past nine! Had
Bob Weevil cajoled her up there, directly they’d finished
their supper? “Where did I once read,” he thought,
“that whatever liberties they allow, they usually fight
shy of their man’s bed? Good Lord! but what are beds?
Beds are nothing. Beds are birth, death, and the morning
and evening. But they’re nothing when it comes to this!
This can take the heart out of any bed.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He recrossed the road to where the lamp-post was.
The particular house just there had no light in the front-windows.
Instead of this there was a small notice which
he could plainly read. “Furnished Room to let. Inquire
within. Mrs. Herbert.” “I suppose I’ve seen Mrs. Herbert,”
he thought, “a hundred times without knowing
her. And I shall never know her. I shall die without
knowing her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He tapped Mrs. Herbert’s railings with his stick. “It’s
not that I grudge Gerda any pleasure,” he thought.
“It’s that I don’t like spectators at <span class='it'>my</span> pleasure. She’ll
be just the same whatever Bob Weevil did. But he’ll always
be there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hiding behind her thoughts like a rat
behind a screen .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and watching me when I touch her.
He’ll be in her thoughts when I’m holding her. He’ll be
always there. I shall be eating with him, sleeping with
him. There’ll always be a slit in her thoughts through
which his eye will be on me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He remembered how his mother had once come home
in high spirits to their London flat, after a conversation
with her cousin, Lord Carfax, and told him how this
nobleman had explained to her his philosophy of free-love,
and how barbarous it was to grow jealous and possessive
when you were enamoured. “Jealous?” he
thought. “Well! He’s more sociable than I am, the good
Carfax. I like to be alone in my house .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. not to be
peeped at by a third person from the back of my girl’s
head!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt an extreme reluctance to move a step from
where he was at the railings of the unknown Mrs. Herbert.
“I’ve talked a lot about reality,” he said to himself.
“But now I know a little better what <span class='it'>mine</span> is .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>This</span> is reality,” he thought. “This is the kind of thing
that men returning home at a quarter past nine, in
Colorado, in Singapore, in Moscow, in Cape-Town, in
New Zealand, see in the darkness! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. This is reality,”
he thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked down at the tiny gutter at his feet between
the asphalted pavement and the road. The lamplight
shone upon this gutter, and he observed a torn piece of
newspaper lying in it—a headline of the “Western
Gazette”—and just tilted against the edge of this headline
he saw an empty greenish-coloured tin. He could
even read the words upon that torn bit of paper—printed
in large, heavy type. “France distr .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. land.” “France
distrusts England,” he repeated to himself; and then
“Lyle’s Golden Syrup.” He could read <span class='it'>that</span>, without
reading it! Much sweetness had he, in his time, watched
Gerda imbibing from such a greenish-coloured receptacle!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Does Mattie make ’em give Olwen <span class='it'>her</span> ‘golden syrup’
out at Pond Cottage? This is reality,” he thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Down under his feet, under this asphalt, under this
Somerset clay, down to the centre of the globe, went the
mystery of solid matter. Up, up above him, beyond all
this thick swine-scented darkness, went space, air, emptiness—the
mystery of un-solid matter. “France distr .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
land”—“Lyle’s Golden Syrup.” Poke them with the end
of an oak-stick.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “You’ll walk into a pit with your
precious stick, master!”—was that what Jason had said?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Pluralism, pantheism, monism! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Phrases .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
phrases made by men who come home at a quarter past
nine. But these sounds too .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. these large, easy, purring
sounds .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. part of reality!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Did Bob Weevil pull up her clothes? They like to have
’em unhooked better than that .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. untied .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. slipping
down.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. They never lose that sense .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. They belie
’em when they say they lose that sense. What sense? The
beauty of their beauty .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the sense of being <span class='it'>beautifully</span>
loved .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “This is reality,” he thought. “They belie
’em when they say .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Up or down, Bob Weevil?
That’s the question. Up is infinite. Down is infinite.
Pantheism, dualism, pluralism! An ounce of civet, good
Master Jason!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved on and stood by the little iron gate of his
own house. He did not look up, because there suddenly
came to him the nervous idea that she was kneeling on
the floor in her short “slip,” peeping out at him; and he
didn’t feel in a mood to be peeped at!</p>

<p class='pindent'>What he did was to stare at the latch of the gate, wondering
if he could lift it without making any sound. She
had so often heard that “click” and come running to
welcome him. He felt that to make that particular noise
now would be as if he entered her presence with his face
blackened all over like a clown.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But now there arose a different question. His mind began
tying itself in a knot like a twisting snake. His own
voice was in his ears assuring Christie that, all day and
all night, he did nothing but live with her in his thoughts,
telling her everything! Could he now tell her everything?
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. She who at this very minute was no doubt
standing at <span class='it'>her</span> window? Why couldn’t he tell her everything?
Why couldn’t he tell her that it wasn’t that he
grudged Gerda pleasure .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that it was only that he
grudged Bob Weevil the <span class='it'>sort</span> of pleasure he had got from
that tombstone-picture! Why couldn’t he explain all this
to Christie; why couldn’t he explain to her that it was
not the thing itself, but only the way .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the way in
which Bob Weevil did .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. whatever it was he did?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He knew perfectly well that Christie understood his
attachment to Gerda. He knew perfectly well that she
would understand his resentment at the intrusion of Bob
Weevil. What he could never, <span class='it'>never</span> make her understand
would be this cold, sickening nausea he felt toward
the simple, actual facts of what must have gone on. How
<span class='it'>could</span> Gerda allow it? How could she?</p>

<p class='pindent'>But perhaps she did struggle a little—if only out of
pride—when Bob Weevil began fumbling. But soon there
could have been no sound at all except their breathing,
except their hard breathing .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Gerda would suffer, if
she knew about Christie, the most secret of feminine sufferings
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. deeper than “France distr .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. land” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
But a man coming home at a quarter past nine suffered
too, the most secret of male sufferings .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “An ounce
of civet, good Master Jason!” He bent his head low
down over the little iron railings, trying to think—to
think and get it all clear.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He leaned against the little gate, while some unperturbed
portion of his consciousness set itself to wonder
whether it were a marigold or a petunia that emitted a
faint whitish lustre in the darkness. There were plants of
both of them there; but he couldn’t remember their position—whether
the marigolds were there or <span class='it'>there</span>! Then
a thought came into his head that made him straighten
his back, click the latch, open it, and walk boldly to the
door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>If Gerda and Mr. Weevil were really fond of each
other—if the girl had grown weary of him and his heavy
lumpish mind—why couldn’t they separate .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. he <span class='it'>his</span>
way .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. she <span class='it'>her</span> way?</p>

<p class='pindent'>To his surprise—in spite of the lighted candle upstairs—Gerda
was seated quietly, contentedly, calmly, at
a table in their parlour. She was hemming an apron; and
before she smilingly rose to greet him, he saw her quickly
but carefully fix her needle in her bobbin of white thread.
She threw her arms round his neck and kissed him, not
passionately or perfunctorily, but affectionately and
gaily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I had tea late and waited supper. It’s all ready in the
kitchen,” she said, releasing him. And then she stretched
herself, with both arms outspread; and her careless air
of indolent well-being was accentuated by the childish
smile that covered a shameless yawn. Wolf returned to
the passage to hang up his hat and place his stick in its
accustomed corner. He could not help thinking of Jason
as he did this.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he returned she was folding up her sewing and
putting it away in a drawer. She looked at him smilingly
over her shoulder. “I’ve had a visitor for tea, Wolf.
Guess who it was.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It wouldn’t be much of a game for me to guess <span class='it'>that</span>,
Gerda,” he said with all the lightness he could assume.
“Careful! Careful, now!” his fighting-spirit whispered
to his excited nerves. “If you make the least false move
she’ll have you at a disadvantage.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why not?” The girl approached him, as she spoke,
giving him a long, scrutinizing glance. “What’s the matter,
Wolf? Is anything wrong?” She laid both her hands
on his coat, clutching its unbuttoned flaps and tightening
them round him with a gesture that was at once imperative
and cajoling.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I met Bob Weevil just now,” he murmured, trying to
give the words a natural tone, and smoothing out every
sign of treachery from his face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But with incredible rapidity, even while she was lifting
up her chin and opening her lips, the self-protective
demon in him cursed him for a blundering fool. “Why
did you blurt <span class='it'>that</span> out?” said the demon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And he told you he’d been here?” Her words were as
calm as if she’d said, “And he told you he’d been playing
bowls.” She released her hold upon his coat and
with easy naturalness ran out into the passage and thence
into the kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf heard her collecting the supper-things. He heard
the sound of running water and the sound of metal
against earthenware. He looked round the room. Ah!
<span class='it'>there</span> was something he hadn’t noticed before, a draught-board
open, with the black and white disks jumbled in
casual confusion over its checkered surface.</p>

<p class='pindent'>So they had been playing draughts!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He walked thoughtfully up to this object and began
piling up the round wooden counters, one on the top of
another, balancing his shaky tower with his fingers as it
began to sway. Then he removed his hand, and his tower
fell with a crash, and many of the pieces rolled on the
floor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The house was so still that the sudden noise brought
Gerda running into the room—to find him standing by
the draught-table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s the matter with you?” she cried peevishly.
“Aren’t you going to help me get supper? Aren’t you
even going to wash your hands?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So you and Bob were playing draughts? I never knew
you even knew the game, Gerda,” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come and wash your hands,” she replied in a calm,
scolding tone. “I’ve got tomato-soup. It’ll be ready in a
minute. I’ll tell you every bit of the gossip about Bob
when we’ve sat down! Of course I know draughts. Bob
taught me years ago, when I was little. Today I won
every single game. I was ‘huffing’ him all the time. But
<span class='it'>do</span> come, Wolf. I’m hungry. Never mind picking up those
things!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He followed her into the kitchen and stood there, awkwardly
and sulkily, till the meal was ready.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m going to have beer tonight, Gerda,” he said. “I
don’t know if <span class='it'>you</span> are.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I certainly am!” she said in her most cheerful tone,
seating herself at the table and breaking a piece of bread
with one hand, while she dipped her spoon into the
soup with the other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He went to the cupboard and came back with three
bottles.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wolf .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>dear</span>!” she cried, with her mouth full.
“Who’s the third bottle for? Have <span class='it'>you</span> got somebody
coming in?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s for me,” he remarked laconically. “I’m tired tonight.
I’ve had a long day.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But, Wolf—isn’t it rather extravagant drinking so
much at one meal?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He didn’t reply to this, but busied himself with opening
two of the bottles and with filling her glass and his
own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s good .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. this soup .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. isn’t it, Wolf?” she remarked
presently, passing the tip of her pink tongue over
one corner of her perfectly curved lip and lifting her
spoon once more to her mouth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He poured half his glassful of beer, froth and all,
down his throat without a word! Then he began swallowing
the soup in rapid gulps.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good soup .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very <span class='it'>good</span> soup,” he muttered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She gave him a quick, penetrating look over her own
raised glass, just sipped at the white foam, and then replaced
the tumbler on the table. The next spoonful she
lifted slowly, meditatively, absent-mindedly, a little
puckered frown hovering about her forehead.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf set himself obstinately and resolutely to finish
the meal. Eating pieces of crumbled bread, hurriedly, intently,
as if the process were something important in itself,
leading to some desirable consummation, he kept
drinking the beer in long draughts. The moment the first
bottle was finished he opened the other, and with the
same concentrated, absorbed determination disposed of
that also.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good soup .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very <span class='it'>good</span> soup,” he repeated, as if
the words were a sop thrown over his shoulder to some
insatiable Cerberus of the river of Time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I am the weakest, most gullible fool,” he thought, as
he watched Gerda spreading a large slice of bread and
then very deliberately taking little bites out of it, “ever
born into the world. I oughtn’t to be called Wolf Solent
at all! I ought to be called Mr. Thin Soup or Mr. Weak
Beer.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Aren’t you going to give me a cigarette?” asked
Gerda.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He got up to obey, and it seemed to him as if the
physical effort it required to hand her what she demanded
and to hold towards her a lighted match, were
the heaviest material task he had ever stretched his
muscles to perform.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He lighted one for himself, however, and resumed his
seat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In complete silence now, save for the ticking of the
clock on the mantelpiece, the greyish-blue spirals of
smoke rose from each end of the table and floated hesitatingly,
fluctuatingly, towards one another, high up
above the two human heads.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s the weakness of your nature, Beer-Soup,” he
said to himself. “The weakness and the gullibility.” Then
he recalled the sudden bold resolve with which he had
clicked the latch of their gate; and he compared that
flash of inspiration with his wretched feelings now. Didn’t
he know himself at all? What he felt now was a complete
disintegration of desire and will. He felt as if his
consciousness were a tiny fitful flame, no, not a flame
even, a scarcely visible vapour, hovering over a chaos of
conflicting wishes, purposes, desires, hopes, regrets, that
were so disorganized as to utterly cancel one another.
They felt remote from him, too, these feelings that ought
to have been his—remote and infinitely contemptible!
The only desire this weak, floating awareness retained
was a desire to escape from them altogether. For disorganized
though they were, a dull nausea, sickening
and paralyzing, ascended from them, troubling that
feeble, free consciousness of his, as a putrefying body
might trouble some frail “animula vagula” only half-escaped
from it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He struggled to use his brain, his free brain. “What
<span class='it'>is</span> the matter with you, you lump of asininity? Speak up,
express yourself, Mr. Wolf Beer-Soup!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he suddenly recalled what he had felt as he
drank that Dorchester ale in the bowling-green of Farmer’s
Rest. He had felt completely master of his destiny
then. All these disorganized emotions, all these nervous
electric currents, were gathered up then and focussed.
Was he perhaps .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. innately incapable of dealing with
women, whether in the way of lust, or in the way of
tenderness? Was he only <span class='it'>a man</span> when confronted with
men? Thrown with women, did his whole nature turn
lumpish, sapless, porous? He began suddenly to have
that appalling sensation which had come to him on
Babylon Hill, as if his head .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the thing that said
“I am I” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. were twisting and turning, like an uprisen
hooded serpent .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. above a body of unspeakable decomposition.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Like a drowning man he stretched out his thoughts
for help in every direction. To his mother he stretched
them out. To his father he stretched them out. Feebly
and automatically he carried his thoughts like a basket
of dying fish to the threshold of Christie’s room.
“Christie! I must tell you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I <span class='it'>must</span>, I <span class='it'>must</span> tell you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But it seemed to him then as if even Christie’s mind
were shut to his helplessness. He seemed to hear her cry,
“Stop, Wolf, stop! I can’t bear to hear it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This can’t go on,” he thought. “I must end this somehow;
or I shall go mad.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rose to his feet and began pacing up and down the
kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda watched him in silence for a moment or two;
and then, extinguishing the remains of her cigarette
against the edge of her empty soup-plate, she said to him,
quite naturally and quietly:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wolf darling, just run upstairs, will you, and see if
I left my candle burning? I want to wash up before we
go to bed.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stared at her in bewilderment, blinking his eyes.
Then he lifted his hand to his mouth and held it there—held
it to hide that trick he had, when he was at the
limit of his endurance, of working the muscles of his
lower jaw.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda calmly rose from her seat and began gathering
together the things on the table. “<span class='it'>Do</span> run up and put out
that candle, Wolf,” she repeated. “We don’t want a fire
in our house.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He obeyed her in silence now, and ascended the creaking
steps, dragging his feet. He felt as if some completely
different person—some docile, harmless, lumpish idiot—had
taken the place of the Wolf he knew.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he entered the room he found that the candle
she had left there was low down in its candlestick, burning
and guttering sideways, and dropping grease over
the cover of the chest of drawers. He bent down mechanically
to blow it out, receiving as he did so the full force
of the carbonic-acid gas in his face. With no conscious
purpose in his mind, he approached the bed, and, in the
darkness, passed his hand hesitatingly over both the pillows,
as if feeling for something.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he stood straight up against the edge of the bed,
his knees touching the sheeted mattress, his arms hanging
limp at his sides.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Quite externally and objectively, as if it had been
this idiotic other person and not himself at all who
formulated the thought, he wondered whether it was <span class='it'>after</span>
she had let Bob Weevil make love to her up here, or
<span class='it'>before</span>, that the game of draughts had been brought out.
A hideous commentary upon this problem seemed to
arise then from the mass of his own disorganized nerves.
“Why don’t you ask Christie what <span class='it'>she</span> thinks? Christie is
a girl. Christie will be able to tell you whether it was
before the draughts or after the draughts!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He left the bed and went to the open window, hearing,
as he did so, the sound of Gerda’s clattering with the
supper-things as she calmly washed up below.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The window was open at the top, so that to get the
coolness of the air he was forced to lean his elbows upon
the woodwork and rest his chin upon the back of his
folded hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He remembered to the end of his life what he felt at
that moment, while the bone of his lower jaw met the
bones of his knuckles pressed so hard against them. He
felt absolutely alone—alone in an emptiness that was
different from empty space. He did not pity himself. He
did not hate himself. He just endured himself and waited—waited
till whatever it was that enclosed him made
some sign.</p>

<p class='pindent'>By slow degrees it dawned on him that he had been
for the last two or three minutes seeing something without
being conscious of what he saw. Now it began to
grow slowly plain to him, lineament by lineament, feature
by feature, what it was he had been seeing in the
darkness of that room, in the darkness of this obscure
night.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was the face of the man on the Waterloo steps! And
out of his abominable misery Wolf cried a wordless cry
to this face; and the nature of this cry was such that it
seemed to break—so desperate it was—some psychic tension
in his brain. And it seemed to him that what he was
appealing to now was something beyond his mother, beyond
his father, beyond Christie herself—something that
was the upgathered, incarnated <span class='it'>look</span>, turned toward life’s
engines, of every sentient thing, since the beginning of
time, that those engines had crushed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The smell of the pigsty across the way must have been
the reason why the <span class='it'>look</span> he appealed to was only partially
human. It was an animal look .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it was a bird
look .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it was the look of the fish’s eye that he had
seen on a counter as he came along the street that very
night; it was the look of a wounded snake’s eye that he
had had time to mark long ago, out on some country
road near London, before he ended its suffering.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was, in fact, the Life-Eye, looking out on what hurts
it, that he now knew he had caught glimpses of, all the
days of his existence, in a thousand shapes and forms.
From air, earth, water, had he intercepted the appeal
of that little round living hole .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that hole that
went through the wall .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. straight into something else.
Into <span class='it'>what</span> else? No one knew or would ever know. But
into something else. It was upon <span class='it'>this</span> he was crying out
now .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. upon that eye .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. upon that little round
hole .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. upon that chink, that cranny, that slit, out of
which life protested against its infamous enemy!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Was that the heart of Wolf Solent howling a wordless
howl in a dark bedroom, or was it the voice of Mr.
Round of Farmer’s Rest seeking escape from his “worries”?</p>

<p class='pindent'>A sigh of unutterable relief shivered through Wolf’s
nerves as they relaxed and yielded. He drew back from
the window and began with an almost cat-like movement
licking his hurt knuckles.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His whole being seemed dissolving into some lovely
liquid-floating substance, lighter than human flesh, and
he became capable of thinking now with every portion
of his identity, easily, freely, spontaneously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve learnt one thing tonight,” he thought, as he
crossed the room and felt about in the darkness for the
handle of the door. “I’ve learnt that one can’t always get
help by sinking into one’s own soul. It’s sometimes necessary
to escape from oneself altogether.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He ran down the little staircase with happy agility.
He burst into the kitchen, where he found Gerda placidly
and abstractedly polishing her knives and forks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How long you——” she began; but the words were
stopped upon her mouth by an imprint of impetuous, almost
boisterous kisses.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he held her in his arms, Wolf’s thoughts were of
the most intense and rapid kind. Why was it that his love
for Christie hadn’t protected him from all this agitation?
Why had he been paralyzed by Gerda’s calm? How was
it that, in the unbelievable relief he experienced now, he
really felt as if it didn’t <span class='it'>very much</span> matter what the water-rat
had done or hadn’t done?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Releasing Gerda now, he seemed to bewilder her a
good deal more by his high spirits than he had done by
his moroseness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t let’s go to bed <span class='it'>just</span> yet,” he said. “Let’s go for
a tiny stroll down the road.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, Wolf, how funny you are tonight! A moment
ago you were telling me that you were quite exhausted.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She yielded good-humouredly, however, to his caprice,
and they went out together into the narrow road.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had the strangest feeling as he clicked the latch
of the gate to let her through. It was as if he were breaking
some law of nature—refuting some inflexible scientific
category of cause and effect.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He kept his arm tight about her, and led her up the
road, in the direction away from the town, till they came
to the place where the immense ash-tree lifted its
branches into the dark air high above their heads.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a small gap in the hedge at this point, and
Wolf pulled her through it, into the meadow on the other
side. “For the second time tonight!” whispered his
demon. But for some reason the mockery glanced off
from Wolf’s present mood of slippery buoyancy, without
causing him the slightest discomfort. “Very well,
then,” he mentally retorted, “for the second time it
<span class='it'>shall</span> be!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They found themselves now under the very trunk of
the vast tree whose branches they had so often watched
from their upper room. One branch bent so low down
and stretched out so far that they instinctively put their
arms about it and dallied with its cool foliage. Wolf even
amused himself by gathering up those great multiform
leaf-growths, so different from the foliations of all other
trees, and twisting them, without breaking their flexible
stalks, about the girl’s bare neck.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda remained passive and yielding under this dalliance.
It seemed to him that her mind was a little aloof;
but he could see, without seeing it, the faint, docile
smile, like that of a sweet-natured child drawn into a
game it was ready to play without understanding, with
which she submitted to his humour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All at once there came a sudden coolness upon his face
and a quick rustling above their heads. The wind was rising.
Oh, this was what he had been craving for, ever
since his return to Preston Lane! It had been—he knew it
now—something in the heaviness of this windless air
that had caused half his trouble. Had this cool wind been
blowing when he crossed the threshold, everything would
have been different. It was the wind he wanted, the wind,
the wind; to blow away all odious eidolons of Bob
Weevil’s presence out of his “sober house”!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He permitted the leafy ash-twigs that he had been
bending to swing back to their natural position; and
snatching at Gerda’s arm above the wrist, he drew the
girl, like a captive, right up to the trunk of the great
overshadowing tree. She remained still passive, gentle,
unresisting, by his side, her head drooping a little, her
whole being—so it seemed—lost in a calm untroubled
quiescence. Holding her thus, but turning away from her,
he rubbed the palm of his free hand up and down over
the hard slightly-indented surface of the ash-trunk, whose
bark, thin and tightly fitted, raised no barrier between
his human touch and the tree’s own firm, hard wood-flesh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Human brains! Human knots of confusion!” he
thought. “Why can’t we steal the calm vegetable clairvoyance
of these great rooted lives?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I simply can’t understand myself,” he thought. “Why,
after being so happy with Christie, should the idea of
Bob Weevil, poor, lecherous little rat, have worried me
so? And why didn’t I make a scene with Gerda—raise
denials, anger, tears, reproaches? Why, instead of that,
did I just muddy up my own wits?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Still retaining his clasp of Gerda’s wrist, he leaned
forward and pressed his bare forehead against the trunk
of the ash-tree.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s this, Wolf Solent? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What’s this, you
lumpish, mock-Platonic, well-cuckolded ass? Ash-tree!
Ash-tree!” Why had he been allowed by the justice of
things to deny himself a single embrace with Christie,
only to come home at a quarter past nine and find a lit
candle in Gerda’s bedroom? Platonic cuckold! That was
just what he was.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Not even Platonic .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. for
Christie despised that word.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mock-Platonic cuckold!
Oh, it was all coming back! The knot in his mind
was tying itself up again—tight—tight—tight! He continued
to lean against the tree in the position of an animal
that is butting with its skull against some immovable
obstacle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then the Waterloo-steps’ eye, the fish’s eye, the
snake’s eye, the slaughtered pig’s eye, the eye of a caged
lark he had seen once as a child in St. Mary’s Street,
Weymouth, all seemed to melt strangely together—all
seemed to peer out at him from the heart of the tree-trunk
against which he was butting with his skull.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And he thought to himself, “There are ways that I
haven’t tried at all!” And he thought to himself: “Endless
little things are beautiful and wonderful beyond
words. And I can love Christie and forgive her for hating
‘Platonic’; and I can love Gerda and forgive her for
letting Bob Weevil pull up her clothes. And if Christie
and Gerda knew what <span class='it'>I</span> know, they’d forgive <span class='it'>me</span> for
loving both of them! Christie would forgive me for not
telling her. Gerda would forgive me for not telling her.
There are things a person can’t tell. But there’s a way
of floating like a mist out of my pride and conceit.
There’s a way of accepting myself as Mr. Promise-Breaking-Beer-Soup,
and yet not minding it at all .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
just becoming a cloud of mist that enjoys this cool
wind .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a cloud of mist that pities everything and enjoys
everything!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He swung away, back from the tree, at this, and let
Gerda go.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ve hurt me, Wolf!” the girl cried peevishly.
“Why did you do that? I haven’t done anything to you.
I wouldn’t have come out with you if I thought you were
going to act so funny. Come! Let’s go in. What do you
think I am, to stand so much silliness? You’re drunk—that’s
what’s the matter with you; you’re just drunk and
acting silly!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was so delighted to receive nothing but this very
natural piece of scolding, that he only answered by hugging
her tightly to his heart. “Little Gerda! Little
Gerda!” he kept repeating. And he thought to himself:
“I’ve exaggerated the whole thing. She <span class='it'>can’t</span> have let
Weevil play with her and be like she is now!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then an idea came into his mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t be cross, sweetheart,” he said. “If I <span class='it'>was</span> drunk,
I swear I’m all right now. But listen! Do let me lift you
up into this tree, just for a minute! I’d so adore to hear
your voice out of the leaves above my head and not see
hardly a glimpse of you! <span class='it'>Do</span> get up into it, Gerda, and
let me hear your voice from up there. You needn’t climb
far. I can’t climb trees at all. I get dizzy. Or I’d climb it
with you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl was still apparently enough of a child to be
stirred by this unexpected appeal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But I’m so heavy, Wolf; and this branch is so high
up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, no, it’s not—it’s not! There—shove yourself up
on the palms of your hands. Jump—and lift yourself—you
know? Like boys do on walls!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He bent down and encircled her body with his arms,
just above her knees, and lifted her up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda pressed her hands upon the bough as he had
suggested, and after a few struggles was lying prone
along it, holding it so closely with her arms and legs
that he could hardly distinguish the one living thing from
the other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well done, sweetheart!” he cried. “That’s right. Now
work your way towards the trunk. Careful now! Straddle
your legs—you’ll scratch your knees like that—straddle
your legs and hold with your hands!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Again she obeyed him with good-humoured docility.
And as he watched her shadowy figure riding the swaying
branch, he could not help recalling the wicked
tombstone-picture; and the thought—the very last thought
he expected to cross his mind that night—flitted into his
senses, that it would be a desirable moment when he blew
out the candle in their room—blew out that candle for
the second time!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s it, Gerda, that’s it! Now get hold of the branch
above, and pull yourself on to it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He came nearer the tree-trunk and gazed up into the
darkness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In a second or two he lost sight of her altogether,
for Gerda was an adept at climbing trees. All he could
detect was a vague rustling; and even that was very soon
swallowed up by the murmur of the whole dark mass of
foliage, stirred into movement now by the rising wind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He waited. He leaned his back against the trunk. He
listened to the long-drawn swish—swish—swish of the
invisible, rustling leaves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then his heart gave a leap within his body and he
caught his breath with an indrawn, quivering gasp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A blackbird was whistling above his head! Faint and
low at first, each liquid flute-note went sailing away upon
the wind as if it had been a separate pearl-clear bubble
of some immortal dew. Then, growing louder and
clearer, the notes began following rapidly one upon another;
but each one of them still remained distinct from
the rest—a trembling water-transparent globe of thrilling
sound, purged, inviolable—a drop of translunar
melody, floating, floating, far above the world, carrying
his very soul with it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then the notes changed, varied, overlapped, grew
charged with some secret intention, some burden of immeasurable
happiness, of sadness sweeter than happiness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Rising still, freer, stronger, fuller, they began to
gather to themselves the resonant volume of some incredible
challenge, a challenge from the throat of life
itself to all that obstructed it. Tossed forth upon the
darkness, wild and sweet and free, this whistled birdsong,
answering the voice of the rising wind, took to
itself something that was at once so jocund and so wistful,
that it seemed to him as though all the defiant acceptance
of fate that he had ever found in green grass,
in cool-rooted plants, in the valiant bodies of beasts and
birds and fishes .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “mountains and all hills .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
fruitful trees and all cedars” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. had been distilled, by
some miracle, in this one human mouth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The whistling sank into silence at the very moment
when its power over Wolf’s soul was at the flood. But
without one single second of delay, when the last note
had died, Gerda came scrambling down, laughing, rustling
the leaves, and giving vent to petulant little outcries
as her clothes impeded her descent. Wolf, when she
finally fell, all panting and tremulous with wild gaiety,
into his arms, felt that it was difficult to believe that this
was the same Gerda whom he had watched, that very
noon, asleep on the summit of Poll’s Camp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As they returned hand in hand to their house-door, a
queer, abashed sense came over him that all the events
of this turbulent day had been a sort of feverish delirium.
What <span class='it'>was</span> his mind that it should go through such
agitation and remain unaltered—remain the same “I am
I” of Wolf Solent?</p>

<p class='pindent'>But once again his self-knowledge received a shock.
For no sooner were they inside their small domicile, no
sooner had he glanced at the linoleum on the staircase,
the wooden clock in the parlour, the familiar kitchen-table,
than all these little objects hit his consciousness
with a delicious thrilling sense of happy security, as if
he had come back to them from some great voyage over
desolate and forlorn seas, as if he had come back to them
with his clothes drenched with salt-water and his hands
wounded by tarred ropes! His mind may have remained
unaltered by all this, but it had at any rate been washed
very clean!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Upon every tiniest and least-important object he
looked, that night, with a purged simplicity, a spontaneous
satisfaction. The pine-wood boarding at the edge
of the linoleum stair-carpet, the pegs where their coats
hung, the handles of the dresser-drawers, the rows of
balanced plates, the cups suspended from the little hooks,
the metal knobs at the end of their bed, Gerda’s comb and
brush, the candlestick still covered with grease, and two
exposed soap-dishes on the washing-stand, one containing
a small piece of Pears’ soap and one containing a
square lump of common yellow soap—all these things
thrilled him, fascinated him, threw him into an ecstasy
of well-being.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What was it that Mr. Urquhart had said, that day,
about these little inanimates? Suicide <span class='it'>he</span> was talking
about. But this was different.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a very quiescent Gerda, lethargic and languorous,
who lay down by his side that Friday night. It was
a very indulgent Christie, grave and tender, who listened
now in her room above the shop to his story about ash-trees
and draught-boards—who listened to every thought
he had, as she lay there with closed eyes!</p>

<p class='pindent'>No system at all! Only to dissolve into thin, fluctuating
vapour; only to flow like a serpentine mist into the grave
of his father, into the mocking heart of his mother, into
the ash-tree, into the wind, into the sands on Weymouth
Beach, into the voice of the landlord of Farmer’s Rest.
No system at all!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap18'>THE SCHOOL-TREAT</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda had refused point-blank to invite Darnley
and Christie to supper on Monday night, thus bringing to
nothing Christie’s premonition in the stubble-field. And
now it was the middle of the long, sunlit afternoon—relaxed,
autumnal, mellow—of Mr. Valley’s great gala-day.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The <span class='it'>fête</span> was held in the vicarage-glebe, adjoining that
portion of the churchyard-wall behind which rose the
now four-months-old tombstone of the youthful Mr.
Redfern.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The young men and boys of the village, encouraged at
their game by Mr. Urquhart and Darnley Otter, were engaged
in an interminable cricket-match, a match played
between those who lived west of the church and those
who lived east.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Wolf first left his employer’s library, which he
did some half-hour later than the squire himself, and
entered the school-treat field, he felt nervous and irritable.
Everyone he knew in the world seemed to be
gathered in that enclosure; and as he stealthily shuffled
along the edge of the churchyard, he felt as if he would
like to hide himself from them all, down in the silent
earth along with young Redfern!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found himself at a spot where the wall was very
low, and, turning his back upon the crowded scene,
leaned there for a while unnoticed, gazing at the great
perpendicular tower. With the shouts and laughter in his
ears, that tower looked incredibly massive and silent.
What ebbing and flowing of human lives had it not seen,
since unknown hands in the reign of the first Tudor piled
it up there, stone upon stone!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Well, at least it was something to face the disquietudes
of his own life in the presence of masonry like this, so
subdued, so encrusted, rendered so mellow by the passing
of the generations! As long as Fate allowed him to
eke out his days amid old time-weathered concretions,
like this King’s Barton Tower, he could never touch
certain abysses of misery! Here in these West Country
places he was at any rate spared the atrocity of feeling
the pinch of life’s dilemmas against a background of
monstrous modern inventions. The long, cold clutch of
scientific discovery, laid, like metallic fingers, upon the
human pulse, could not despoil the dignity of existence
here; though the invasion by such inhuman forces had
already begun!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Long may this tower stand, so that men like me can
touch its stones, its buttresses, its lichen, its moss, and
escape from the dragon’s-tail of the stinging present!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was conscious of a stealthy step behind him, and,
turning round, he found Jason Otter at his side.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You are enjoying yourself looking at his grave,” the
poet began; “and I don’t blame you. I like looking at
the graves of people I’ve known. But you go further
than I could go, Solent. You are the clever one, the wise
one, the old cunning one! You can enjoy looking at a
grave though you never knew the person who’s in it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You can’t expect me not to be interested in Redfern,
can you?” retorted Wolf, a little crustily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Of course not. That’s just it. We all feel an interest—a
nice, merry interest—in being alive when someone else
is dead. He only came down here for money,” he added
unexpectedly, “like you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I came for it, I assure you I don’t get it,” said
Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason chuckled a great deal at this remark. Then he
grew grave. “I’ve got a poem here I’d like to read to you,
if it wouldn’t spoil your pleasure in looking at this
young man’s grave. I won’t, if it <span class='it'>would</span>.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve looked all I want to look,” said Wolf; “so do
read me what you’ve got there. I’m glad of any excuse
not to go round the field and hear so much talk.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sit down, then, a minute .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. do you mind?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two men sat down at the base of the wall and
leaned their backs against it, facing the school-treat
meadow. Jason produced from his pocket a small notebook,
which he opened very deliberately upon his
knee.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s about white seaweed,” said Jason Otter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I didn’t know it was ever white,” said Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Everything is white at one time or another,” retorted
Jason. “<span class='it'>You</span>’ll be white enough yourself, one fine
day!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If it only gets white when it’s dead,” argued Wolf
obstinately, “I don’t think it’s much of a subject. I like
the idea of seaweed being white in the way chalk is white
or daisies are white; but if it just fades and bleaches
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I don’t think much of that.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s no good abusing me before you’ve heard it,”
said Jason; “but, of course, we know this business of
reading our writings is what your friend Darnley would
call impolite.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go on, man, go on!” cried Wolf. “I’m listening.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And the poet began to read.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“White Seaweed” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He repeated these words a second time, gathering his
energy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“White Seaweed.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“For God’s sake,” cried Wolf, “get on with it! They’ll
catch sight of us in a moment and then it’ll all be
spoilt.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason accepted this impatience with unruffled equanimity,
and began in a low voice; but, gathering confidence
as he proceeded, he read the poem from beginning
to end without a pause.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>White as the foam in the track of a whale</p>
<p class='line0'>As he spouts and sports for a thousand miles</p>
<p class='line0'>Where the waters slope round the planet’s rim,</p>
<p class='line0'>Beyond the continents and the isles,</p>
<p class='line0'>White as the foam that follows him</p>
<p class='line0'>Where there’s never a masthead nor a sail.</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
</div>
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>Drowned and dead from their sunken ships,</p>
<p class='line0'>Drift the bodies of boys and girls;</p>
<p class='line0'>White are they as they float and drift,</p>
<p class='line0'>Their hair like flotsam, their breasts like pearls,</p>
<p class='line0'>While the grey tides lift them, or cease to lift,</p>
<p class='line0'>And the green tides gurgle between their lips.</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
</div>
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>Fishes’ eyes in the cold grey deep,</p>
<p class='line0'>Staring and waiting, waiting and staring,</p>
<p class='line0'>Seagulls’ beaks on the tops of the wave,</p>
<p class='line0'>The same eternal quest are sharing;</p>
<p class='line0'>But the dark, wet, purple, slippery grave</p>
<p class='line0'>Holds safe those bodies in untouched sleep.</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
</div>
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>And out of the flesh of those bodies light,</p>
<p class='line0'>In their dark, wet, purple, slippery bed,</p>
<p class='line0'>A seaweed grows that is soft as silk,</p>
<p class='line0'>White as the moon on St. Alban’s Head,</p>
<p class='line0'>Moss-like, fern-like, white as milk.—</p>
<p class='line0'>The fingers of Mary are not more white!</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
</div>
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>Oh! White as the horn of God’s unicorn,</p>
<p class='line0'>That seaweed lies upon Red-cliff bay,</p>
<p class='line0'>Lies in the spindrift on Red-cliff sands,</p>
<p class='line0'>Fling all your wicked thoughts away!</p>
<p class='line0'>Take off your shoes; anoint your hands!</p>
<p class='line0'>Than to touch such seaweed with careless scorn</p>
<p class='line0'>’Twere better never to have been born!</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Jason’s voice sank; and that peculiar silence ensued
which is fuller of electric cross-currents than anything
else in the world .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the silence produced by the falling
of the seminal drops of verbal creation .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. upon
an alien mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I like it very much,” murmured Wolf at last. And he
thought to himself, “The beggar <span class='it'>has</span> his own peculiar
imagination.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he said aloud: “It’s one of your best poems,
Jason. I don’t think it’s quite up to the ‘Slow-Worm of
Lenty,’ but it does you credit and I congratulate you.
What did you exactly mean by that last verse? Did you
mean that there are people in the world whose wicked
thoughts are aroused by white seaweed, or did you just
mean the ordinary stupidity of human beings?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s not my business to explain what I mean,” said
Jason. “It’s my business to write. I can see what you
think. You think that I just string words together as they
come into my head! It isn’t as easy to write a poem as
you seem to imagine.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why do you write so often about water and about
drowned people?” asked Wolf. “Your pond-elf in ‘The
Slow-Worm’ gave me a weird feeling; and this seaweed
of yours, growing out of drowned bodies——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You needn’t go on!” interrupted Jason. “Of course,
I can’t expect anyone to like my poetry who lives by
copying out the liquorish thoughts of a doting old fool.
We all want to be glorified. My poetry is all I’ve got
and I ought never to have read it to you. I ought to have
known I’d only get abuse. It’s this wanting to be glorified
that’s the mistake. A person ought to be satisfied if
he can get his meals three times a day, without having
to dance attendance on some silly old man or some ugly
old woman!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf swept this aside. “Do you have in your mind any
definite people when you make the newts and tadpoles
tease the pond-elf, and when you make these fish and
gulls want to eat these youthful bodies?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason’s face wrinkled with delight at this.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re afraid I might bring <span class='it'>you</span> in!” he chuckled.
“I wouldn’t mind not being glorified if I could make
your friend Urquhart agitate himself as much as you
do over my poems.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had no time to reply to this; for, to his considerable
surprise, he perceived his mother and Gerda, arm
in arm, advancing towards their retreat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Both he and Jason struggled simultaneously to their
feet and moved towards the two women. Mrs. Solent began
speaking with her accustomed high-pitched ironical
intonation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t take it off, Mr. Otter,” she said, when the poet
raised his hand to his hat. “I know how you hate the
sun; and it <span class='it'>is</span> hot today; though the hotter it is the more
I enjoy it, though I think our pretty Gerda here agrees
with <span class='it'>you</span>.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason, who had succeeded with a certain embarrassment
in lifting his straw-hat a few inches from his head in a
stiff, perpendicular direction, pulled it down once more
over his forehead with grateful relief.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s this?” said Wolf, trying to conceal his discomfort
under an airy jauntiness. “What’s this between
you two?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your mother and I have had several walks together,”
said Jason, “and she knows my ways.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So well as to take a great liberty!” exclaimed the
handsome lady, whose brown eyes were shining with
radiant exultation. And as she spoke she stepped to
Jason’s side and poked something, with her light-gloved
fingers, into its place under his hat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>While this was proceeding, the expression upon the
poet’s face made Wolf astonished. It was the queerest
mixture of physical repulsion with pleasurable, masochistic
submission. He was amazed at his mother’s audacity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What is it that you wear under your hat, Mr. Otter?”
asked Gerda innocently.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The strange man looked at her with a very peculiar
expression—an expression that baffled Wolf altogether.
Then a most beautiful look came into his grey eyes, a
look infinitely wistful and sorrowful, the sort of look
that a disguised and persecuted god, lost among some
savage race that knew him not nor could have comprehended
him if it had known him, might have worn; and
he replied gently: “I feel the sun, young lady. I find
cabbage-leaves a great help. But today”—and here he
smiled a disarming smile—“today it’s a rhubarb-leaf.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Having said this, and with a courtly bend of his body
that would have done credit to a royal personage, Jason
Otter moved off, making his way, with careful manœuvring
to avoid any encounter with the crowd, towards that
part of the field where the old men of the village, seated
on wooden benches, were partaking of cakes and cider.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope you haven’t offended him, Mother,” muttered
Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t think so,” cried Gerda. “What a nice man he
is, Wolf! I like him ever so much better than Darnley.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s because Darnley’s my best friend,” said Wolf.
“It’s a law of nature, sweetheart, isn’t it, Mother?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mrs. Solent completely disregarded this little passage
between them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What Gerda and I came for,” she said, “was to ask
you to show us Mr. Redfern’s grave. Gerda’s never seen
it, though her father made the headstone, and I’ve never
seen it, though I’ve asked Mr. Urquhart a hundred times
to show it to me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s not hard to find,” said Wolf drily. “You could
have gone any day by yourself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s the sport in <span class='it'>that</span>?” laughed the lady, still displaying
the same undercurrent of secret excitement. “The
fun of looking at graves is all in the person you look at
them <span class='it'>with</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. isn’t it, Gerda? I’m sure <span class='it'>you</span> must
have enjoyed yourself watching all the fuss people
make!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t help my father being a monument-maker,”
said Gerda gravely. “It’s a trade, like any other trade.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m not quarrelling with your father’s profession,
child,” Mrs. Solent rapped out. “I’m only saying that
there’s no sport in looking at graves by oneself; and I
<span class='it'>do</span> want to see this one.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There it is, then, Mother!” cried Wolf, almost peevishly.
“Can’t you see? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the tall stone one there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
no! over there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. nearer the Tower,” and he pointed
with his stick.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I want to go up to it,” said Mrs. Solent obstinately,
“and so does Gerda. She told me so just now. We’re
both sick to death of swinging long-legged girls. I don’t
want to see any more frills or garters for the rest of my
life.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, come on, then,” said Wolf petulantly. “You
can climb over this, can’t you, Mother? I suppose Bob
Weevil’s making himself useful at the swings, eh?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Whatever demon it was that made him indulge in this
jocularity, its result was immediate.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda turned on him fiercely. “Don’t be so vulgar,
Wolf. Bob’s playing cricket, and so’s Lobbie. You ought
to know better than to make remarks like that!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t push me, Wolf.” It was his mother speaking,
as she began scrambling over the low moss-grown wall.
“Give me your hand; .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. no! give me your hand.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Soon they were all three standing by Redfern’s grave.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Poor boy!” sighed Mrs. Solent. “Do you know, Wolf,
I heard Roger Monk talking in a queer way last week.
I was asking him about this boy’s death, and he spoke in
such a funny tone about it. He almost implied that it was
a case of suicide. Have you heard anything of that sort?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, just rumours, Mother,” replied Wolf casually;
“just rumours and village-gossip. I’ve never heard of an
inquest, or anything like that. I believe he died in his
bed.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Father talks queer about it too,” said Gerda. “But
do look at that! Is that a mole or a rabbit?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>I</span> don’t know,” said Wolf vaguely. It did not interest
him in any particular way that this newly-grown-over
mound should have been burrowed into or scraped at.
After his many years of London life, the ways of moles,
rabbits, dogs, foxes, were all equally arbitrary, equally
unpredictable. It was, however, brought home to him
now that there <span class='it'>was</span> something exceptional in this phenomenon;
for Gerda, oblivious of the risk of grass-stains
upon her summer frock, went down hurriedly on
her knees and began fumbling with her bare fingers in
the disordered clay, scooping up little handsfuls of dry
brown earth with one hand and filtering them thoughtfully
into the hollow palm of the other hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Are you looking for Mr. Redfern’s bones?” enquired
Mrs. Solent in her most airy manner. “You look like that
pretty girl in the poem, leaning over her Pot of Basil;
doesn’t she, Wolf?” And touching the mound with the
tip of her green parasol she put her head a little to one
side and began quoting from the poem in question in a
mock-sentimental intonation .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>“And she forgot the stars, the moon, the sun;</p>
<p class='line0'>And she forgot the blue above the trees;</p>
<p class='line0'>And she forgot the dells where waters run;</p>
<p class='line0'>And she forgot the chilly autumn breeze.</p>
<p class='line0'>She had no knowledge .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t, Mother,” interrupted Wolf crossly, “Gerda
knows what she’s doing.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The unequalled lines roused their response in him, as
independently of the mocking tone in which they were
spoken as beautiful limbs under a ridiculous disguise;
but this response only annoyed him the more.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What is it, sweetheart?” he cried. “Is it a rabbit? I
didn’t know rabbits ever burrowed in churchyards.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s a mole,” said Mrs. Solent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was Wolf’s turn to mutter something now .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>“Well said, old mole! canst work i’ the earth so fast?</p>
<p class='line0'>A worthy pioneer! Once more remove, good friends.”</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“What’s that? You know perfectly well it’s a mole,
Gerda,” said Mrs. Solent. Gerda remained silent. She
lifted some of the loose earth to her face and smelt it.
Then she leapt to her feet, shook out her skirt, and
rubbed the palms of her hands together. “I give it up,”
she said. “It isn’t a rabbit. There’s no smell of a fox
either. It <span class='it'>may</span> have been a dog.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A mole .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a mole!” repeated the older woman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A <span class='it'>mole</span>!” muttered Gerda, with the profound sarcasm
of the country-bred; and Wolf caught a little red
flush on her cheeks like a crimson shadow on a mother-of-pearl
shell. “Well! <span class='it'>we</span> can’t do anything, anyway,”
she said. “It’s silly to fuss ourselves. Bother! I’ve got
some grit in my shoe!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It spoils the look of the grave completely, this great
mole-hole,” said Mrs. Solent. Then her face lit up, and
she opened her parasol with an eager click. “This is a
bit of sport,” she cried. “Let’s fill the thing up! Never
mind about the school-treat. Where does Valley keep his
spade? We only want a spade and a roll of turf. I saw
some loose turf lying about in our garden. Come on,
Wolf! Let’s go over and get it, and ask Valley where he
keeps his shovel.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her face was full of animation now, and her eyes
shone. Her grey hair and black Gainsborough hat framed
the vivid cheeks of youth. The way she tilted her parasol
as she spoke had something adventurous, almost hoydenish.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come, Wolf, let’s get that turf,” said Mrs. Solent.
“We must ask Valley where he keeps his spade.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As Wolf turned to follow his mother on this impetuous
quest, he caught sight of Gerda, struggling with the strap
of her shoe, as she propped herself with one hand upon
Redfern’s headstone. There was such a look of defiant
anger on her face that he halted irresolutely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, go, if you want to, Wolf!” she cried. “I’m sure
I don’t want to keep you. It isn’t often, though, that I
get a chance of enjoying myself, working like I do in
that dark kitchen all the time!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Solent gave her a steady, surprised stare.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I won’t keep him long, if you want him for your
game,” she said. “I can fill this hole up by myself, if
you just get me the spade and the turf, Wolf.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The flush in Gerda’s cheeks grew deeper. “I think it’s
a shame! Why did you bring me here at all, Wolf, if we
weren’t going to do something nice? I don’t want to
spend this afternoon doing what I do every day in the
week.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Solent gave Wolf a quick, surprised look, full
of airy pity—a look that said, “You poor boy, how awful
for you to be at the beck and call of such a child!” But
aloud she remarked:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all right, Gerda. We won’t spoil your sport. Run
along to your friends. I won’t keep him long.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Gerda’s suppressed anger had mounted so high
by this time that there could be no such easy <span class='it'>dénouement</span>.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She held up her rounded chin and tossed back her
head. Then, clasping her hands behind her, with her
heels close together at the edge of the grave, she regarded
Mrs. Solent with flashing eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Of course Wolf’s on your side. Of course he’ll love
to fool about with your spades and turf, when it’s my
one real treat of the whole summer! You two are both
the same. You only think of yourselves and what you
want. If it’s the silliest thing, like this nonsense about a
mole, and every sensible person knows what a mole-hill
is, it must come first, before everything, just because
you’ve thought of it! Oh, yes, I saw you smiling at him
just now, when my shoe came off. You couldn’t have
looked much different if my stockings had been full of
holes! Everyone can’t buy high-class London things; but
I tell you our Blacksod shops be as good as they be any
day in the week!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, Wolf,” said Mrs. Solent calmly, holding her
parasol at a correct garden-party angle and letting her
high spirits drop away, “the best thing you can do is
to take your pretty young wife back to her friends’
games.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My friends’ games!” retorted the indignant girl. “I’m
as old as anyone, considering all I put up with!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My dear child,” said the elder lady gently. “There’s
really no reason for this excitement. Do try and calm
yourself, and let’s all go back quietly. I’m sure I’m quite
ready to give up my idea if it spoils your pleasure. Don’t,
for mercy’s sake, make such a mountain out of this mole-hill.
I only thought of filling up this hole as a bit of
sport, and because school-treats are so boring.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her words were soothing; but there was something in
the tilt of her eyebrows, as she glanced at Wolf, which
made him realize that she was less unruffled than she appeared.
He knew of old that the one thing in the world
she hated was any display of temper or anything resembling
a “scene.” His own mind at this moment was unable
to resist its furtive commentary upon the way
Chance had managed to stage this encounter between the
two. He had noticed these tricks before. It was as if there
were some special æsthetic laws which Chance delighted
to obey; and it always gave him a peculiar satisfaction to
contemplate this bizarre rhythm. At such moments he
found himself sacrificing action, emotion, sympathy,
every human attribute, in a sort of ecstatic pondering
over what this artistry of Chance was accomplishing. He
felt as if he were in the presence of the unrolling of a
psychic map. The figures on this map—his mother with
her green parasol, Gerda with her grass-stained dress—were
a sort of eddying vortex of significance upon a
stream that was always rippling itself into mystic diagrams!
Chance, in fact, was for ever at work fulfilling
its own secret æsthetic laws; but every now and then,
as at this fatal moment, its creation became especially
vivid, and the whole “psychic map” upon that flowing
stream grew violently and intensely agitated. The circle
of ripples he was now contemplating with this inhuman
detachment had two circumferences, namely, the angry
consciousness of Gerda and the supercilious consciousness
of his mother; but below them both—down there
on the quiet river-floor—was the discolored, decomposed,
unrecognizable face of the young Redfern.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ve never liked my marrying him!” It was
Gerda’s voice he heard now, as he awoke from his metaphysical
trance to realize that part of his mother’s last
remarks had fallen upon nothing but the surface of his
mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve always been an outsider to both of you,” the
angry girl went on. “You’ve always despised me and my
family, and done your best to make him despise us.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I have the greatest respect for your family, my good
child. No one who knows your father can possibly help
it. Come now! It really won’t do for us to make Wolf
embarrassed like this. I’ve the utmost respect for your
people, Gerda, and I’m sure my son couldn’t have married
a lovelier creature than you are, even at this moment!
But do come, now, both of you, and let’s get back
to the field. Mr. Urquhart will be quite lost among those
boys without Wolf’s help.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She laid her hand with a soothing gesture upon the
girl’s wrist; but the glance she gave Wolf was full
of a mocking resignation that threw a screen round them
and railed off this ill-advised proletarian. Gerda’s behaviour
on the other side of this barrier became so irrational
that it could only excite well-bred surprise! But
the girl tossed her hand away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Urquhart, indeed!” she cried. “A nice sort you
are out here, you King’s Barton gentry! Why, I’ve never
cared even to <span class='it'>tell</span> Wolf all I’ve heard Dad say about
what some folks do in this dirty village.” Her voice grew
louder, as her long-suppressed feelings burst forth. Wolf
had fancied in his simplicity that his mother’s airy propitiations
had disarmed the girl; but he under-rated both
Gerda’s perspicacity and her pride.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was something else on Gerda’s mind, too, beyond
her personal indignation. What actually, he wondered,
<span class='it'>were</span> these Blacksod gossips saying? He looked
at the girl with a kind of paralyzed helplessness, and
again the thought struck him how neat a stroke of chance
it was that Redfern’s grave should be the background of
her outburst.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Some of you gentry,” she went on fiercely, “don’t lie
abed with decent consciences like my folks! Why, they
do say down at Farmer’s Rest that landlord Round do
keep his bed, and that Squire Urquhart can get no peace
by night or by day, because of what do taunt their minds
over this poor young man.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In spite of his discomfort, Wolf couldn’t help feeling
faintly amused at Gerda’s struggle to keep the insidious
Dorset dialect out of her speech, a struggle that grew
less and less availing as her agitation rose.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And these be the high-class people that you think so
superior to respectable plain folk like my dear Dad!”
Her voice had a quiver in it at this point that made Wolf
cry out, “Gerda! Gerda darling!” But she did not break
down. On the contrary, her tone grew stronger and more
defiant. “Like my dear Dad,” she went on, “who never
in his whole life said an evil word to anyone. But you
get your spade and your turf and cover up this hole.
Maybe you’ll catch the fox that made it and be surprised!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on, come on, Gerda,” said Wolf peevishly,
stretching out his hand, in his turn, and trying to seize
her fingers. “We mustn’t stay here like this. We shall
be attracting attention soon. Come on; let’s go back to
the field.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His glance wandered from one to the other of these
two figures who held his peace of mind so completely in
their power. He could not shake off the profound inertia
that had fallen upon him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But we <span class='it'>must</span> go back,” he murmured helplessly.
“Come along, Gerda. Please do stop saying these
things.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His voice sounded in his own ears puerile, feeble, futile.
It sounded like the petulance of a child, outraged
and astonished by the tenacious obstinacy of grown-up
people.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had noticed on other occasions this peculiar psychic
phenomenon—that when he was with Gerda and
his mother together, his personality shrank and dwindled
until he felt his actual body grow limp and lumpish.
The supercilious calmness of his mother’s face under
her green parasol, the angry defiance of Gerda’s face
under her simple school-treat hat, with its pale watchet-blue
ribbons, seemed to paralyze him; so that all he
could do was to bow before the storm, like a horse with
its rump turned to the wind and its forehead turned to
the fence! The male animal in him felt quelled and
cowed by these two opposed currents of feminine emotion.
Both of them seemed to him completely irrational
at that moment. His mother’s patronizing irony seemed
absurd, in conflict with the direct outburst of the other;
and Gerda’s violence seemed pitifully uncalled-for. If
he could have felt any sort of complacent superiority, he
could have endured it more easily. But he felt no such
superiority! Irrational though they both seemed to him,
their personalities had never struck him as more attractive
or more mysterious. Their very irrationality seemed
drawn from some reservoir of life-energy that was richer,
more real, more strange and vibrant than the lumpish
bewilderment with which he confronted it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he looked from one to the other, and listened, without
listening, to the rising torrent of Gerda’s wild words,
he felt that it was absolutely impossible for him to take
whole-heartedly one side or the other. He felt not only
inert and helpless; but he felt as if he were himself
torn into two halves by their struggle. He felt as if he
incarnated at the same time his mother’s ironic detachment
and his girl’s passionate grievance. All the long
nights he had lain by Gerda’s side, all their sweet, secret
caresses, clung, like a portion of life itself, to what
he felt then for that young, troubled face under the
watchet-blue ribbons. But in his mangled bifurcated
identity it was impossible to feel hostile to the other
figure. Longer nights with him had been hers, and closer
caresses! How could he, for all the sweetness of his companion’s
body, turn away from the flesh that was his own
flesh?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Reason? Justice? The forces that victimized and paralyzed
him now were those that had created the world.
Who was he to contend against them?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda came to a pause at last, and without a word
to either of them walked off towards the school-treat
field.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then it was that Mrs. Solent turned upon her son
with wide-open eyes and gave him a prolonged stare.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well!” she exclaimed at last, while her tilted parasol
sank down, “there it is! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I think,” she resumed,
slowly and casually, “I’ll go back to the cottage and do
a little gardening before tea. If I mustn’t tidy up your
graveyard, at least I can tidy up my landlord’s garden!
Digging in the earth for an hour or two will give me
an inspiration perhaps about all our affairs. I’m tired of
this treat and I’ve done my share.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right, Mother,” he said, casting a quick glance
after Gerda, whose muslin frock and blue hat were now
disappearing over the wall; “I’ll take you a little way
and then go back.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They walked round the church and out of the main
entrance into the road. When they had passed the gate
into the field, and were almost at the point where Pond
Lane debouched from the village-street, they overtook
the furtive figure of Jason Otter, hurrying surreptitiously
homewards.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He gave a start of dismay when they came up with
him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You won’t tell Urquhart you saw me,” he said hurriedly.
“The truth is I can’t stand it any longer seeing
that great lumbering gardener of his swaggering about
at the wicket. No one can get the great fool out. He hits
boundaries all the time. They oughtn’t to have let him
play! He thinks because he won that bowling-match he
can do everything. And, of course, with a lot of little
boys like that, who consider he’s a great batsman——”
A look of dismay covered Jason’s face like a frayed
shroud, as he spoke these words.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They think he’s a kind of County Player,” he added
gloomily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Were you playing yourself?” enquired Mrs. Solent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Any one of the Ramsgard second-eleven could send
his bails flying!” continued Jason. “Wilson Minor would
have got him out for a duck’s-egg.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A faint wrinkling in the lines of the poet’s profile
indicated that some mental image was exciting his proclivity
to roguery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve never heard of Wilson Minor,” murmured Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason cast a sidewise glance at him and then looked
at Mrs. Solent. He seemed to imply that these intimate
affairs of the Second Eleven of Ramsgard School were,
where women were concerned, rather to be concealed than
revealed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you know him?” enquired Wolf boldly, taking
the bull by the horns.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a moment’s hesitation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He bowls left-handed,” Jason threw out. “They twist,
too. This stall-fed head-gardener couldn’t stand up to
them for a moment.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is he a nice boy?” persisted Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>I</span> like him,” said the other nervously. “I have only
seen him three or four times. I took him to tea once
at the Lovelace. But that was only because I <span class='it'>wanted tea</span>;
and when I’m alone, that waiter always stares at me so.
When I first spoke to him he thought I was a new master.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What does he think you are now?” said Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason chuckled. “An undertaker perhaps; or a private
secretary, like you! But he sees I’m honest; and he knows
I know a good bowler.” He paused for a second. “We
all like to be praised!” he added grimly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jason,” said Wolf, feeling a sudden qualm about
Gerda, “why don’t you take my mother home? She’ll give
you a splendid cup of tea .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. better than you could
make for yourself at Pond Cottage .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and I know
there’ll be nobody in your house now. Mother, you’d
like that, wouldn’t you? I know how well you two always
get on.” He felt so impatient to be off, that he cared
nothing for the effect of this suggestion upon either the
poet or the lady. But Mrs. Solent looked not altogether
displeased at this turn of events.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He hurried away now, avoiding any glance at Jason
to discover how this prospect appealed to him. He had
no difficulty in finding Gerda when he reached the field.
She had not yet joined in any game, and it was quite
easy to take her aside. She was in a mood of reserved
apathy, neither apologetic nor defiant, just remote from
the whole stream of events, and a little sad.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you really hear all that about old Urquhart?”
he asked her, anxious to distract her mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She smiled faintly; and he was so delighted to welcome
that sign of a return to her normal self that he
gave scant consideration to the substance of her reply.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well—not in those very words, Wolf! But Dad do always
tell that there was something queer about this
young gentleman’s end; and if it weren’t the Squire,
’twere at least Landlord Round who folks have seen,
mooning and mowling round that grave.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on, Gerda!”—he spoke as energetically and
gaily as he could—“let’s hear what you really think!
You don’t <span class='it'>yourself</span> think that it wasn’t an animal that
made that hole, eh?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s not talk about it any more,” the girl replied.
“I was angry, and you know why; and you know that
any girl who wasn’t made of rags and straw would
have been angry! If I said more than I meant, you must
forget it, Wolf, and forgive me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Together they advanced now, boldly and unhesitatingly,
into the midst of the crowded field. They soon
came upon Mattie and Olwen, hand in hand, watching a
three-legged race, in which the most buxom and spirited
of the maids of King’s Barton, tied together in couples,
were contending for a bag of sugar-candy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Olwen greeted Wolf with her usual passionate intensity.
“Mattie won’t race,” she cried. “Do make her
do it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But <span class='it'>you</span> can race if you like,” Mattie retorted. “That
big girl who looks like winning was ready to run with
you.” Mattie turned to Gerda, as she said this, with something
like an appeal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t like racing,” she added. “Besides, I’m not
dressed for it, am I?” and she glanced down at her new
black frock.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, that’s nothing,” mumbled Wolf; and then, observing
that Gerda had bent over the child and was diverting
her attention, he took his sister’s arm and led
her aside. “Everyone I’ve met today seems upset by
something or other,” he began, as soon as they were well
in the rear of the onlookers at the race. “I don’t know
whether it’s because I’m nervous myself; but there’s a
bad wind blowing from some quarter.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you think there’s something the matter with <span class='it'>me</span>?”
she asked. “You’re too sympathetic, Wolf dear. To tell
you the truth, I do feel rather grim this afternoon. I
<span class='it'>ought</span> to have let them tie Olwen and me together; but
I couldn’t bring myself to it. I hadn’t the heart for it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf glanced back over the heads of the spectators.
He could see that Gerda had possessed herself of the
child’s hand and that they were both watching the proceedings
with absorbed attention.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They’re all right,” he whispered. “Let’s go for a bit
of a stroll.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They moved off together towards a vacant portion of
the meadow, midway between the cricket-match and a
noisy group of smaller boys.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now, what is it, Mattie?” he said, pressing her unmercifully.
“I’ve seen you so little lately that I can’t
follow your moods. But I’ve never seen such a depressed
look. It’s far sadder, your face today, than when Mr.
Smith died. It’s a different kind of sadness. It makes
me wonder.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dear Wolf! I assure you, you needn’t fret about
me. I’m all right. You worry too much about people.
You can’t take <span class='it'>everyone’s</span> sorrows on yourself. People
have to go through things sometimes where no one can
help them.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf stood stock-still and laid his hand on her wrist.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t begin those platitudes, Mattie, or you’ll make
me angry. I don’t take anyone’s sorrows on myself. But
you know .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I feel as if .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” He stopped short and
stood hesitating, wondering how he would dare to
broach the various troubled intimations that had been
crossing his mind concerning her and Darnley. They
moved on again, and his words still hung uncompleted
in the air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>To help him out she tentatively repeated, “You feel
as if?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. don’t be angry with me if I’m plunging
into something too”—he hesitated for a word—“too frail
to bear the weight of my clumsiness. But I’m not blind.
I’ve seen that you and Darnley have something between
you, some subtle understanding. I was glad to see it.
You don’t know on what a long road it started my fancy!
So now, when I see you looking ‘grim,’ as you call it, I
can’t help thinking it must be because of .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you
know? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. something gone wrong between you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie gazed at him dumbfounded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Wolf .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” she gasped. She
looked so hopelessly confused and so wretchedly miserable,
as she stood there before him, her heavy eyebrows
twitching, as she frowned, and her mouth a little
open, that Wolf was afraid he had made some gross blunder
that might be terribly hurting to her reserved nature.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But there’s nothing in it at all!” she cried pitifully.
“Darnley and I are just friends. I’ve always felt he
understood me better than anyone I’ve known. But that’s
not much, Wolf. You know how many people <span class='it'>I’ve</span>
known! There’s nothing more that’s between us, Wolf.
What made you think there was?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, all right, Mattie,” he muttered, rather sulkily.
“I see you have to keep your affairs to yourself, and I’m
not the one to force anything on you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He broke off; for he saw her face assume an expression
that was completely new to him and to which he
had no clue.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Swinging round, and following the direction of her
eyes, he saw Darnley and Mrs. Otter coming straight
across the grass towards them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I came to find Olwen,” the old lady began. “I’m going
home now, and I thought it would leave you freer
if I took her with me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d much rather come back with you,” said Mattie.
“But I expect I ought not to desert Mr. Valley quite as
early as this. What is the time, Darnley?” Darnley
looked vaguely round. “Oh, of course you haven’t your
watch with you,” the girl went on. “Have you the time,
Wolf?” Wolf looked at his watch, one of the few objects
in his possession that was of monetary value. His
Weymouth grandmother had given it to him as a child;
and there were moments when merely to take it out of
his pocket brought him a kind of reassurance, as of
things quiet, stable, continuous, in the midst of turmoil.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s ten minutes past seven,” he announced; and as
they separated, he caught a look between Mattie and
Darnley that made him wonder if, after all, his instinct
had not been on the right track.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Has the Squire gone home yet?” enquired Wolf, as
he and Darnley walked slowly towards the cricket-pitch.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t know. I expect so,” the other answered
absent-mindedly; and then, as they came nearer: “No,
he’s there still.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they reached the outskirts of the game they
stood for a while in silence, a little behind the player
who was fielding at “point.” Mr. Valley was umpiring on
one side and Mr. Urquhart on the other; and it interested
Wolf to note that it was his own hand that was instinctively
lifted to salute the clergyman, and Darnley’s to
salute the squire. One of the batsmen proved to be none
other than Bob Weevil; and Wolf was sardonically
amused at his own expense when he found that this fact
gave him a thrill of unexpected relief. There was little
chance, for some while, anyway, for Mr. Weevil and
Gerda to pair off, unless the sausage-seller was prepared
to sacrifice his reputation as a batsman to his
amorous propensities; and, as Wolf watched him now,
playing with skill and caution, this seemed the very last
thing he was prepared for.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What would you do, Solent,” began Darnley suddenly;
and Wolf, glancing quickly at him, observed that
his head was turned away and his gaze fixed intently
upon the bowler at the further end of the pitch. “What
would you do if you were in love with a girl and had at
the same time some peculiarity that made all women repulsive
to you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf deliberately attuned his voice, as he replied to
this, to a flat, dull intonation, as if Darnley had said,
“What would you do if you were bowling at Bob Weevil
and he had ‘got his eye in’?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It would entirely depend on who the girl was,” he
said, keeping his gaze on the bare arms of the young
grocer, as he balanced his bat in the block and bent his
slim body forward.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s all very well,” rejoined the other, “but you
can’t go against nature beyond a certain point.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf raised his voice a little at this, as Bob Weevil,
swinging his bat round, slogged the ball vigorously to
leg and began to run.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Nothing is against nature!” he retorted. “That’s the
mistake people make; and it causes endless unhappiness.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley replied in three muttered, disjointed words,
stressing each of them with a deliberation that had something
ghastly in it. “Patience .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. pretend .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. perhaps.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf paused to join in the loud general clapping that
indicated that the batsmen had scored six runs. Then
he pointed with his stick. “Come on,” he said, “there’s
Miss Gault over there, watching the tug-of-war. Let’s
go and speak to her. I particularly want to avoid getting
caught in a long conversation; but, at the same time,
I <span class='it'>must</span> speak to her. It would be outrageous not to. But
if you come with me, Otter, I shall be safe.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Darnley smiled and took his friend’s arm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was then, as they moved across the field together,
that Wolf discovered that the touch of Darnley’s hand on
his arm agitated his nerves to a pitch of exasperation.
Inexplicable to himself, this mounting anger with the
man he loved so well gradually grew so intense that he
could hardly endure it. He exerted a superhuman effort
to restrain his nervousness; but his friend’s very consciousness
of his mood was rapidly making it impossible
for him to control himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sunshine made Darnley’s beard glitter, as if it
were composed of shining gold; and this effect, though
he noticed it calmly enough with one part of his mind,
increased Wolf’s irritation. It was all he could do to prevent
himself from seizing upon this beard and pulling it
viciously. Darnley was now holding Wolf’s arm so
tightly that he felt a blind impulse of animal resentment
rising up within him—an impulse upon which his nervous
irritation rocked like a cork upon a wave.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Avoid! Avoid!” he suddenly flung out; and with the
same spasmodic impulse, as he uttered this strange cry,
he tore his arm free. “It’s a trick! It’s a trick! It’s a
trick!” He let his voice quiver without restraint, as he
hissed out these words, though he knew perfectly well
that the ugly contraction of the muscles of his mouth, as
much as the word itself, must have been very agitating
to his companion. But for this, just then, he cared nothing.
If he could have made clear to that anxious face
that now gazed at him so concernedly, what he really
felt at that moment, it would have resolved itself into
something like this: His mother and Gerda had lost their
separate identities. They had become the point of a prodding
shaft of yellow light that was at the same time the
point of Darnley’s trim beard! This shaft was now pushing
him towards another misery, which took the form of
a taste in his mouth, a taste that he especially loathed,
though he could only have defined it, even to himself,
as the taste of salad and vinegar! But, whatever it was,
<span class='it'>this taste was Miss Gault</span>. The shaft of yellow light that
prodded him on had the power of thinning out and
bleaching out his whole world, taking the moist sap
quite away from it, leaving it like a piece of blown
paper on an asphalt pavement. Between these two things—the
blighting light and the corrosive taste—he felt an
actual indrawn knot of impotence tying itself together
within him, a knot that was composed of threads in his
stomach, of threads in the pulses of his wrists, and of
threads behind his eye-sockets! Everything in the world
that was lovely and precious to him was being licked up
by a mustard-coloured tongue, while a taste of constricting,
devastating sourness began to parch his mouth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were now close behind the back-row of spectators.
“She was here just now,” said Darnley. “She must
have gone round to the other side.” Wolf knew perfectly
well that his friend referred to Miss Gault, but he only
murmured, in a weary, drawling voice, “Who’s that you
say’s gone over to the other side?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was <span class='it'>that</span> in him that was ashamed of what he
was doing .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>that</span> in him that knew well enough that
he was only behaving in this childish way because of his
profound reliance upon Darnley’s affection and concern;
but his nerves were so completely jangled by this time
that he was just tinder-wood for any casual spark.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The spark soon came; for, emerging from the crowd,
and coming straight to meet them, appeared the familiar
figure of Mrs. Torp. Of all people in the world, Mrs.
Torp was the very last with whom he felt himself capable
of dealing just then. This did not prevent her from
approaching them with extended hand, her face rigid
and yet festive, bearing an expression like a waxen murderer’s
in Madame Tussaud’s, while from the top of her
bonnet a big purple feather nodded with a diabolic gaiety
all its own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>If it had not been for this lively and obtrusive feather,
Wolf might have retained his self-control; but this, combined
with that rigid, festive smile, proved the last straw.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mrs. Torp! Mrs. Torp! Mrs. Torp!” he yelled, at the
very top of his lungs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stop that, now! Stop that, Wolf!” said Darnley
sternly, seizing him by the elbow, just as he had done
before.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Quarrelling young gents, be ’ee?” said Mrs. Torp;
while, in the hurried rush of his shame, Wolf, hardly
knowing what he did, shook her vigorously by the hand.
“You be too fine a figure of a man, Mr. Otter, to come
to school-treat with brawlings and babblings brewed in
pub-bar. Mercy! and what a face upon’s shoulders have
our Mr. Solent got! Don’t let my Gerdie see ’ee with
thik face. What be come to, young gents, what be
come to?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At this point Mrs. Torp was side-tracked in her volubility
by the appearance of her son Lobbie at her side.
“You get back, you limb of Edom, where you belong!”
she cried, giving the boy a vigorous push. “What dost
want here, dirty-face, ferreting round like the weasel
thee be? Get back where ’ee belong, and don’t plague the
gentry!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf’s thundering outcry had made other heads
turn about; and soon quite a little group began to gather
round them. The voice of Mrs. Torp was naturally penetrating;
and the nature of her discourse—intermittently
caught by inquisitive ears—did not lessen this effect.
Wolf and Darnley soon found themselves, in fact, in the
unenviable position of a sort of side-show to the main interest
of the tug-of-war. It was clear enough, however,
that none of these staring rustics had caught the real
significance of Wolf’s unpardonable outburst. They must
have simply supposed that in some fit of whimsical impatience
he had peremptorily summoned his wife’s
mother to that particular spot.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Such at least was the impression gathered up for future
reference by that unclouded portion of Wolf’s own
mind, which, like a calculating demon perched on the
top of his head, calmly contemplated the whole scene.
Mrs. Torp herself, as far as he could make out, never
deviated one second from her preconceived notion of the
incident; which was, to put it bluntly and grossly, that
the two young gentlemen had had a drunken quarrel!</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was with a very distinct feeling of relief that Wolf,
as he moved forward hurriedly now to meet the approach
of no less a personage than Selena Gault, recognized
that his father’s old friend had no conception of
anything unusual in that cry, “Mrs. Torp! Mrs. Torp!”
which, resounding across that small arena, had informed
her of his presence there.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is poor Mrs. Torp to be dragged into this game,
then?” said Selena, as she shook his hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf muttered some lame jest about tug-of-wars and
lean people, and then found it inevitable that he and
Miss Gault should wander off together, leaving Darnley
to deal with the Torp family.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His nerves were not yet altogether steady; for he
found it necessary to reply in nothing but patient monosyllables
to what Miss Gault was saying. By degrees,
however, her discourse became so personal that these
replies began to gather a dangerous intensity, although
they still remained abrupt and brief.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m glad to find you, boy. I’ve been hoping and hoping
I should get a word with you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dear Miss Gault!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re not angry with me any more for opposing
your plan about Mattie and Olwen? I confess it seems
to have worked out better than I ever supposed it would.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. no.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“As long as she doesn’t meet that terrible old man
or that crazy girl——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s that?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I forgot. They tell me you yourself visit those
people, Wolf.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who tells you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Of course, you have to go there for books. I understand
that. But there are reasons which are hard to explain,
boy, why I’d sooner see you enter .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. enter a
workhouse .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. than go into that house.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Malakite was my father’s friend.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She raised one of her gloved hands to her mouth at
this, as if to restrain the quiverings of her upper-lip.
“You don’t know what you’re saying, Wolf! His friend?
That man corrupted his soul; and he did it with his
accursed books.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was saved from making any answer to this by the
sound of a familiar but by no means pleasant voice calling
him by name.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Solent! Mr. Solent!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned on his heel and beheld Bob Weevil, still
in his shirt-sleeves, smiling and perspiring after a violent
run.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s up, Weevil?” he asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The young man bowed respectfully to Miss Gault and
gasped for breath.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Urquhart sent me to find you, sir,” he panted.
“He says you must umpire now instead of him. He has
to go now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Solent is taking care of me, Weevil,” said Miss
Gault indignantly. “What does the man mean by ‘must’
umpire? I don’t see where the ‘must’ comes in.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf looked the excited lad up and down. Miss Gault’s
words had not abashed him in the least. There was even
an air of spiteful arrogance in his manner, an air which
seemed to say, “As the Squire’s emissary to his secretary,
I am the most important person here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m afraid there is a ‘must’ in this, Miss Gault,” Wolf
said quietly. “It was agreed between us before we came
on the scene that I was to umpire when Mr. Urquhart
had to leave. It isn’t Mr. Weevil’s fault that he happens
to be the messenger of ill-fortune!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The lady drew herself up in high dudgeon. “Well!
Run off, both of you, as fast as you can,” she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The annoyance of Miss Gault, thus expended upon
both men, had the natural effect, as they went off together,
of closing up in a measure the rift between
them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They passed the swings on their way, and a common
masculine weakness for the sight of ruffled skirts held
them for a moment behind a group of hobbledehoys who
were enjoying this spectacle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They love swinging,” remarked Wolf carelessly, as
Weevil and he moved away at last; “but those boys being
there makes it delicious for them.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Bob Weevil sighed deeply; and this pitiful sigh, rising
up from the young man’s aggravated senses went
wavering skyward. Past a high trail of flapping rooks,
heading for Nevilton, it went; past the flocks of the
white clouds. At last, far beyond all human knowledge,
it lost itself in the incredible desirableness of lovely
blue space, and mingled, for all we know, with the vast
non-human sighing of the planet itself, teased by some
monstrous cosmogonic lust!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hearing this sound, Wolf glanced sideways at his
young rival, and an unexpected flicker of sympathy for
that water-rat profile ran through him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They crossed the field in silence; and the thought that
he was going to meet Mr. Urquhart recalled to Wolf’s
mind that mysterious aperture in the side of Redfern’s
grave. Could it be possible that there were in the village
people so crazed by remorse for this boy’s death that
they actually had been making mad attempts to disinter
his bones? Such, at any rate, from what Gerda
hinted, would not have struck these Dorsetshire gossips
as impossible. But impossible, of course, it was! It was
one of those morbidly monstrous fancies that, as he knew
well from the Squire’s own collection of weird documents,
did sometimes run the round of these West Country
villages, passing from tavern to tavern, and growing
more and more sinister as it went. Something in this
quarter of the land, as soaked with legends as it
was with cider-juice, seemed to lend itself to such
tales!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, sir!” he said, as he approached the wickets
where Mr. Urquhart stood at attention like a sober sentinel
on the ramparts of Elsinore, “I’m ready to relieve
you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The cheerful complacence with which his employer
accepted his docile obedience caused his nerves to assert
themselves again in a surprising manner.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If you’re going to say good-night to Valley before
you leave, sir,” he said brusquely, “you might tell him
that something or somebody has been scratching a hole
in that grave in the churchyard!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A queer cowardice, or discretion perhaps, prevented
him from looking at Mr. Urquhart’s face as he tossed
out this remark. He followed it up, without a second’s
pause, by crying out “Right you are!” to the batsman
opposite him, and by moving hurriedly aside into his
place, a yard or two from the wicket, so that the new
“over” might commence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All that he could take in of the effect of his words
was the look of his employer’s back, as the man moved
away, not at all in the direction of the clergyman’s black-coated
figure, but straight towards the little group of
spectators who surrounded the seated form of Roger
Monk, occupied just then in keeping the score.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart’s back, as Wolf followed it with his
eyes at that moment, seemed to him to resemble the back
of Judas Iscariot in that popular picture entitled “Pieces
of Silver,” of which there used to hang a cheaply coloured
reprint in his grandmother’s house at Weymouth.
It did more than stoop with its usual aristocratic bend,
this back. It sagged, it lurched, it wilted. It drifted towards
that bench of heedless spectators as if it had been
the hind-quarters of the Biblical scapegoat, driven forth
into a wilderness whose desolation was not material, but
psychic. The neat clothes that hung upon it only accentuated
the ghastliness of this back’s retreat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It may be believed that Wolf’s umpiring was not of
the most alert or efficient kind that evening. But it sufficed;
it served its purpose. For the game itself was dragging
a little tediously now, and most of the lads were
weary of it and longing in their hearts for the grand
consummation of the eventful day.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was the hour of the twilight dancing, a celebration
that, taking place in a roped-off portion of the
meadow furthest removed from the churchyard, was the
supreme source of responsibility and concern to the
authorities—the thrilling climax and crowning episode
to the boys and girls of King’s Barton!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Long before the cricket-match was over, all the other
sports had drawn to a close. Tired groups of children,
disputing about their prizes and gorging themselves with
butter-scotch and barley-sugar torn from sticky paper
bags, drifted across the hill towards the gate, followed by
voluble mothers with overflowing parcels and sleeping
babies clutched tightly in their arms. The older men had
found themselves seats here and there, and were smoking
their pipes with an air of cautious relaxation, an
air that stopped short of the complete abandonment of
Farmer’s Rest and yet had unstiffened beyond the superceremonious
atmosphere of the earlier hours of the afternoon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The youths and the maidens, from all parts of the
field, along with a drifting concourse of outsiders attracted
by the occasion, gathered now, impatiently and
nervously, round the weary cricketers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Kingsbury Band, duly stimulated by its full quota
of traditional refreshment, was now tuning up for the
great moment of that gala-day. At length, to Wolf’s infinite
relief, the last bails fell; the captains of the two
sides pulled up the wickets; the score was proclaimed in
indifferent tones and amid lethargic cheers; and the
whole company hurried towards the dancing-plot.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf, as he looked about for Gerda, crossed inadvertently
the path of the perturbed Mr. Valley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’ll be dark in an hour,” said the anxious Vicar,
glancing up at the sky; “but they will hardly have begun
then.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There’s a nice scent of trodden grass in the air,” remarked
Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What a time! What a time!” wailed the little priest,
disregarding the interruption.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s wrong, my dear man?” sighed Wolf indifferently,
searching with his eyes the groups who passed
by for a glimpse of Gerda’s white gown. “What’s troubling
you? Dancing’s all right. There’s no harm in dancing.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little priest laid his hand upon the front of Wolf’s
coat. “Dancing!” he muttered peevishly. “Oh, you Londoner,
you Londoner! It’s not the dancing I’m thinking
about. Do you suppose it’s only for the dancing that all
these men are collecting? I tell you I’ve never known
one single visit of the Kingsbury Band to this place when
there hasn’t been some girl—and they’re always the
wrong ones—got into trouble! If I could keep ’em
penned up in these ropes, they might dance till dawn!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf made a grimace and moved away. There seemed
to him, at that moment, as he thought of Gerda and his
mother, such far worse things in the world than the episodes
dreaded by Mr. Valley, that he found it impossible
to give him the remotest sympathy. Mr. Valley,
without knowing it, however, had his full revenge for
this callousness in less than a minute from when they
parted. For there was Gerda’s white gown! And there,
side by side with it, were Mr. Bob Weevil’s white shirt-sleeves!
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. As he walked up to them trying to assume
his most invulnerable philosophic calm, Wolf thought to
himself, “I’ll let her dance one dance with him and then
off we’ll go .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. back to Blacksod!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They did not observe his approach till he was quite
close.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hullo, Gerda! Hullo, Bob! Look here, you two.” He
paused awkwardly, staring at Gerda’s sash. “I don’t
want,” he went on, “I don’t want——” He seemed to
catch a defiant look on the girl’s face. “I don’t want to
break this up till you’ve danced once tonight. So go
ahead, for heaven’s sake, as soon as they start.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Only, listen, Weevil——” He paused again, and found
it necessary to take several long breaths. He had said
exactly what he meant to say. He had said it in the tone
he meant to adopt. Why, then, were those two staring at
him like that, as if he were a ghost? Did his face look
funny to them? Was “the form of his visage changed”
upon them? “I mean,” he went on; but his voice sounded
unsure to his own ears now—unsure and queerly mechanical,
as if it issued out of a wooden box. “I mean
that you’d better have one good dance, or perhaps two
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. two certainly! Two would be far better than one
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. one dance is nothing .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What’s one dance? Nothing
at all! And then .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and then .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what was I going
to say? That band’s making such a noise! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Oh,
then we’ll walk home, Gerda; and perhaps Bob will come
with us. But I expect not, with Mr. Valley so jumpy.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What are you talking about, Wolf?” said Gerda
abruptly. “What’s the matter with you? Is there anything
wrong? I thought we’d agreed that I was to stay
for the dancing. You’ve no objection to my dancing with
Bob, have you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I beg your pardon, Mr. Solent,” broke in the voice
of the young grocer, “but what was that you said about
Mr. Valley being ‘jumpy’? I couldn’t hear what you
said; and I don’t see, anyway, what it’s got to do with
me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did we decide that I had to wait till midnight for
you, Gerda?” said Wolf sternly, disregarding Mr. Weevil.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, let me be! Let me be, Wolf!” cried the girl
angrily. “I don’t know what’s come over you tonight
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you and your mother! I suppose you’ve been over
there again and she’s been talking to you again. I don’t
know what you take me for! I’ve danced at King’s Barton
School-Treat since I was no bigger than Lobbie. I
don’t know what you’ve got against it, or against me and
Bob. You’ve been over to Lenty Cottage! That’s where
you’ve been; and she’s sent you back to punish me for
what I said to her. I haven’t said I was going to dance
with Bob at all. Bob isn’t my only friend here. Mother’s
going to stop to the end. She always does. And I shall
go back with her. I don’t want either you or Bob, I tell
you! You’ve never treated me like this before and I
won’t stand it! <span class='it'>You</span> can walk back with him if you like,
Bob. I’ll be glad enough to see the last of both of you!
I want to enjoy myself tonight.” She moved away as she
spoke, and Wolf caught a look of miserable consternation
upon the water-rat physiognomy at his side. “I don’t
want any men to dance with!” she flung back at them.
“I’ll dance with no one but girls. But I <span class='it'>will</span> enjoy myself
in spite of you all! I won’t depend on any of you for
my pleasure .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and I’ll go home with Father and
Mother!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She walked off haughtily, her blue-ribboned hat held
high, and was speedily lost to sight in the gathering
crowd.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf and Mr. Weevil stood staring at each other
stonily and awkwardly while the long-awaited music
burst triumphantly into the familiar strains of the Kingsbury
Jig.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After a few seconds, with an abrupt lifting of his
hand, Wolf moved away. He pushed through the crowd
with the air of a complete stranger who finds his path
impeded by some popular transaction that means nothing
to him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>On the outskirts of the field he was arrested by the
sight of a figure that seemed familiar to him. Yes! It was
the automatic young lady from Farmer’s Rest. But there
was another girl there—a younger girl—and he recognized
her too. She was the maid in the white muslin
frock whose shameless manner of swinging had arrested
Weevil and him an hour ago. This younger girl’s head
was turned away; but as he approached them, he caught
a full glimpse of the automatic young lady’s face. She
was too absorbed, however, in what she was doing—fastening
a safety-pin or something in the other’s waistband—to
give the least attention to him. But what was
this? The look he captured upon her face was a look
of unmistakable emotion, rapt, intense emotion, such as
a boy would have displayed when he was caressing the
object of his desire. Like a flash it came over Wolf, as
he wavered there for a second, that he was in the presence
of a passionate perversity, kindred to that he had
discovered elsewhere in this Dorsetshire village; and he
was a little startled to find how the presence of it set
his heart beating and his pulses throbbing. Something in
him pleaded desperately to be allowed to remain a second
longer on this unhallowed ground; but he resisted
the temptation, and hurried forward. But what did this
mean? How could he explain this in himself? That kindred
obliquity, which he had so recently tracked down
among the “higher circles” of King’s Barton, had not
affected him to anything resembling this degree of vicious
sympathy! The vision of those two girls remained
like a deadly-sweet drop of delicious fermentation in
some vein within him—some vein or nerve that seemed
in contact with the very core of his consciousness. Like
some virulent berry-juice, insidiously sweet and yet maddeningly
bitter, like a drop of that old classic poison
distilled from the blood of the enamoured centaur—that
look, that gesture of the Farmer’s Rest girl teased and
troubled him. The averted head of her muslin-frocked
companion, the contour of that soft, conscious, youthful
profile, stirred his senses even more.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Damn!” he thought. “Don’t I yet know the worst of
my vicious, secretive nature?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt startled rather than ashamed by what arose
within him; but what <span class='it'>did</span> trouble him, to a kind of inward
fury, as he left those preoccupied girls, was the
ricochet of this discovery upon his jealousy over Gerda
and Bob! Who was he to indulge in sulky jealous heroics,
when he himself was capable of a feeling like this?
To be angry with those two, to be bitterly hurt, and yet
not to be able to indulge in the undertone of his own
grievance without knowing himself to be an unphilosophic
fool—<span class='it'>that</span> was the point of the spiritual wedge
that now was driven into his disordered life-illusion!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Was Lord Carfax, that whimsical “man of the world,”
of whom his mother loved to relate the shameless opinions,
right after all? Had he always over-rated the connection
between sex and that mysterious struggle in the
abysses, with which his “mythology” was concerned?</p>

<p class='pindent'>In regard to the perversity of Mr. Urquhart, he had
taken for granted that the man’s sex-aberration was
merely the medium through which unspeakable emanations
of evil—beyond sex altogether!—flowed up into
the world.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But what <span class='it'>is</span> this evil?” he asked himself now letting
his mind hover like a hungry cormorant over the heaving
waters of his troubled senses. Vague intimations concerning
some sort of <span class='it'>inert malice</span>, that was beyond all viciousness,
rose up within him as his mind’s deepest response.
Hunting irritably for some gap in the hedge by which to
escape, he tried to define this inert malice. Was it
an atavistic reversion to the primordial “matter,”
or “world-stuff”—sluggish, reluctant, opaque—out of
which, at the beginning of things, life had had to force
its way? Was this, and not his attitude to any youthful
Redfern, the real secret of Urquhart’s harmfulness?</p>

<p class='pindent'>All the while he struggled with these thoughts, he kept
feverishly skirting the hedge, striking it every now and
then with his stick. If he could only find a gap by which
to escape! This hunt of his for a gap into the next field
began to assume almost symbolic proportions. Something
within him was tugging at him all the while to make
him turn his head and cast another furtive glance at those
two girls. Were they still together there, just where he
had left them? He began to indulge his imagination, letting
it tantalize and provoke him with the tremulous intensity
of the feeling that sight might have aroused. He
knew he could cool his excitement, blunt it, undermine
it, stave it off, by analyzing its nature; but the feeling
itself was so deadly-sweet to him that it pleaded in “a
still, small voice” for a postponement of this invasion of
his reason!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Was it his jealousy over Gerda that had made him
so porous to this quivering, breath-taking obsession?
Indignantly his soul shook itself to and fro in its endeavour
to escape. Like a slippery-scaled fish it shook itself,
turning sideways, turning belly-up, as it strove to
force its way through the strands of the net that encircled
it. Why was it that this glimpse of the amorous feeling
of one girl for another girl should send this trembling,
dissolving, shuddering provocation through him? Was it
that the mere importunity of the feeling, so intense, so
sterile, emphasized the mysterious quality of desirableness?
Did it imply a diffusion of the magic of beauty
through the whole identity of the desired one, such as can
rarely take place where great creative Nature, contemptuous
towards both lover and beloved, shamelessly occupied
with her own enormous purposes, is baiting the trap?</p>

<p class='pindent'>What a queer thing it was that the attraction of this
muslin-frocked little hoyden should have been barely emphasized
for him by Weevil’s desire for her, but increased
to a point of shivering, electric sweetness, under the emotion
of the “automatic young lady”! Oh! it had <span class='it'>that</span>
within it that might lead him upon such a quest that
nothing else would matter to him any more! He could
feel even now, as he went along this stubborn hedge, the
sort of scoriac desolation—all delicate intimations become
cinders and ashes in the mouth—that would possess
him, as this quest grew more and more concentrated!
He felt within him the actual <span class='it'>expression</span> his face would
come to wear, as in his maniacal pursuit he went to and
fro over the earth, oblivious of all else.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had just reached this point in his mental struggle,
when he suddenly did find a gap in the obstinate hedge.
Forcing his way hurriedly through, careless as to how
he pricked his face and hands, he descended from the
high hedge-bank into a field of mangelwurzels. Over this
field he now strode, while the gathering twilight deepened
about him, oblivious of all purpose save to escape—to
escape into the peace of his own soul.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The mangelwurzel-field behind him at last, he blindly
pushed his way through a second hedge, this time caring
not even to find a gap. What next awaited him was a
succession of stubble-fields, some of which had patches
of purple clover growing amid their corn-stalks, the dark
foliage of which, soaked with heavy dew, quickly penetrated
his boots. This physical sensation, the sensation
of walking barefoot through an endless dew-drenched
twilight, gradually soothed and calmed him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He went obstinately forward, crossing field after field
in the falling darkness, forcing his way recklessly
through every sort of rank vegetation, through every sort
of arable fallowness. He had left the school-treat field for
more than an hour now. He had crossed, almost without
consciousness of doing so, the main road between Ramsgard
and Blacksod. He had threaded his way through the
maze of small, grassy lanes that lay between that highway
and the village of Gwent. And now, emerging in
the scented autumn night into a rondure of sloping hills,
he could see, beyond the scattered lights of Gwent, a
vast unbounded region, shadow within shadow, vapour
within vapour, a region that he knew to be—though all
he could actually see was darkness of a thicker, richer
quality than the darkness about him—the umbrageous
threshold of Somerset, the first leafy estuary of that
ocean of greenness out of which rose, like the phallus of
an unknown god, the mystical hill of Glastonbury!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stretched himself out on the grassy slope of this
shadowy amphitheatre and gazed long and long into the
vaporous obscurity before him. The quarrel between
Gerda and his mother became nothing. Nothing and less
than nothing became his jealousy over Weevil .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. his
vision of those two girls!</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was as though he had suddenly emerged, by some
hidden doorway, into a world entirely composed of vast,
cool, silently-growing vegetation, a world where no men,
no beasts, no birds, broke the mossy stillness; a world of
sap and moisture and drooping ferns; a world of leaves
that fell and fell for ever, leaf upon leaf; a world where
that which slowly mounted upwards endured eternally
the eternal lapse of that which slowly settled downwards;
a world that itself was slowly settling down, leaf upon
leaf, grass-blade upon grass-blade, towards some cool,
wet, dark, unutterable dimension in the secret heart of
silence!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lying upon that rank, drenched grass, he drew a deep
sigh of obliterating release. It was not that his troubles
were merely assuaged. They were swallowed up. They
were lost in the primal dew of the earth’s first twilights.
They were absorbed in the chemistry, faint, flowing,
and dim, of that strange <span class='it'>vegetable flesh</span> which is so
far older than the flesh of man or beast!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stretched out one of his hands and touched the
cool-scaled stalks of a bed of “mare’s tails.” Ah! how
his human consciousness sank down <span class='it'>into that</span> with which
all terrestrial consciousness began! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was a leaf among leaves .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. among large, cool,
untroubled leaves.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. He had fallen back into the
womb of his real mother.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. He was drenched through
and through with darkness and with peace.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap19'>WINE</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>The three autumn months that followed the
School-Treat became for Wolf, as the days shortened and
darkened, like a slowly rising tide, that, drawing its mass
of waters from distances and gulfs beyond his reach,
threatened to leave scant space un-submerged of the
rugged rock-front which hitherto he had turned upon the
world. Something in the very fall of the leaf, in the slow
dissolution of vegetation all about him, made this menace
to the integrity of his soul more deadly. He had
never realized what the word “autumn” meant until this
Wessex autumn gathered its “cloudy trophies” about his
ways, and stole, with its sweet rank odours, into the very
recesses of his being. Each calamitous event that occurred
during those deciduous months seemed to be brewed in
the oozy vat of vegetation, as if the muddy lanes and the
wet hazel-copses—yes! the very earth-mould of Dorset
itself—were conspiring with human circumstances.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was during many a lonely walk among the red-berried
hedges and old orchards, where the rotting cider-apples
lay wasp-eaten in the tangled swathes of grass,
that these events worked their wills upon him. Sunday
after Sunday, as September gave place to October and
October gave place to November, he would lean upon
some lichen-covered gate and struggle to give intelligible
form to these “worries” of his. Threaded in and out of
such ponderings were a thousand vivid impressions of
those out-of-the-way spots. The peculiar “personality” of
certain century-old orchards, of which the grey twisted
trunks and the rain-bent grass seemed only the <span class='it'>outward</span>
aspects, grew upon his mind beyond everything else. How
heavily the hart’s-tongue ferns drooped earthward under
the scooped hollows of the wet clay-banks! How heavily
the cold raindrops fell—silence falling upon silence—when
the frightened yellow-hammers fled from his approach!
He felt at such times as though they must be
composed of very <span class='it'>old</span> rain, those shaken showers; each
tremulous globe among them having reflected through
many a slow dawn nothing but yellow leaves, through
many a long night nothing but faint white stars!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He certainly had anxieties enough this Autumn to bring
down his happiness to a very muted key. The head
and front of these “whips and scorns of time” had been
a complete break with Urquhart. The Squire’s obsessions
had got upon his nerves to such an extent that he had
just recklessly revolted—flung up his work on this detestable
history of Dorsetshire scandals—and, cutting
his coat to suit his cloth, fallen back upon a rigid monotony
and economy between Preston Lane and the School.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The results of this quarrel might have been much more
serious than they were, if he had not, by Darnley’s diplomatic
help, obtained both more work and more income
at the Grammar School. But this piece of good luck had
been followed by a second calamity; for his mother, in
her reckless, irresponsible fashion, had also annoyed
Urquhart, and had consequently been compelled to give
up Lenty Cottage and join him in Blacksod. Twenty-five
pounds, therefore, of his increased salary had to go now
to pay for a room she had taken a few doors from them
in Preston Lane. Here she lodged in the house of that
very Mrs. Herbert, whose name was already familiar to
him. She had managed to obtain, however, a job for
herself in the town, and was highly amused and extremely
pleased by her unexpected success in the conduct
of it. But this also was attended by an unpleasant
consequence, her business being nothing less than the
managing of a tea-shop belonging to Mr. Manley of
Willum’s Mill! Wolf would have been quite resigned to
this development, if his mother had not, in her gay,
ironic manner, cast a magnetic spell over the bull-necked
farmer and entered into some sort of humorous flirtation
with him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As far as those two perturbing figures in the background
of their days were concerned—Bob Weevil and
Christie—matters relapsed during these long autumn
months into a curious state of suspension. He would go
to tea with Christie; and once or twice Gerda spoke of a
visit from Bob. But as winter set in, and the nights lengthened
to the December solstice, it seemed as if the burden
of his monotonous work in the classroom, and the rigid
economies practised by Gerda in the house, had undermined
the spirit of adventure in both their natures.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was surprise at his own obstinate patience in the
tedious routine of teaching history to the Blacksod
tradesmen’s sons. What supported him were the moments
of ecstasy he derived from his long week-end walks. He
had the whole of Saturday free, as well as Sunday, and
sometimes with Gerda, and sometimes alone, he would
follow the wraith-like vapours of autumn as they drifted
over the lanes and hills, and give himself up, with a
large forgetfulness of everything else, to his sensuous-mystical
mythology.</p>

<p class='pindent'>If it had not been for this secret refuge and for the
sensations accumulated in these walks, Wolf’s first winter
in Dorset would have culminated in a miserable inertia,
resembling that of the luckless Redfern. For one thing,
Gerda seemed completely to have lost her miraculous
power of bird-whistling. He caught her making the attempt;
but recently, as far as he could tell, she had
given the thing up. He suspected, too, that Darnley and
Mattie were unhappy; but, ever since that day at the
School-Treat, both those reserved beings had remained
completely uncommunicative as to their relations with
each other, though on all other topics he found them as
affectionate and spontaneous as ever.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There had been little frost and no snow before Christmas.
Gloomy, damp days had succeeded one another all
through the month; and now, on the last Sunday of the
old year, it seemed to Wolf, when he awoke in the darkness,
that the air smelt of deep pools of rain. He awoke
that morning long before his companion; and once awake
he lay thinking intensely and excitedly for several hours.
It was of his mother he thought. She had dropped a hint,
while he was at Mrs. Herbert’s on the previous night,
that she would like to start a tea-shop of her own, and
that she thought of borrowing the money for this project
from her present employer. Wolf was startled at the
depth of the hurt to his pride that this information dealt
him. In the early hours of that rain-smelling morning he
made a drastic resolution. <span class='it'>He would go back to Urquhart!</span>
What did it matter how he outraged his conscience
over that accursed book, so long as his mother got this
help from <span class='it'>him</span> rather than from the owner of Willum’s
Mill? Oh! And what pleasure to be able to hand over a
little solid money to Gerda after her long, miserable
economies! He knew so well the list of desirable purchases
in the girl’s mind—from the silver sugar-tongs to
a grandfather’s clock! It always touched him, the way
Gerda put things for the house above things for her own
person. Yes! That is what he would do: run round to his
mother’s after breakfast, find out how the land lay with
regard to the tea-shop project, and then set off for King’s
Barton. Urquhart would most certainly be at home on
Sunday morning; and he knew exactly how he would
deal with the man. He would ask him point-blank for a
cheque for two hundred pounds. He would ask for this on
the understanding that he should finish the book for him
in three months—finish it, in fact, by the anniversary of
his first arrival in Dorsetshire!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was so excited by the idea of this daring move that
it was with difficulty he refrained from jumping out of
bed; but Gerda being sound asleep, and to wake her a
couple of hours before her usual time being likely to
make her cross for the whole morning, he restrained his
impulse and continued to lie still.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was early enough, however, when finally he rang
the bell of Mrs. Herbert’s house; for the landlady, evidently
just returning from eight-o’clock Mass, came up
to her door at the same moment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-morning, Mrs. Herbert,” he said, as pleasantly
as he could. But when the woman had let him in and
was proceeding to announce him, a faded picture of
“The Bombardment of Alexandria,” hanging in her hall,
brought to his mind all the lodging-houses he had ever
entered! It was as if from each of these places some
polished bannister-knob, some vase of dead bulrushes,
some dusty ornamental chair, some vague odour of Indian
spice or of dried-up seaweed, added its quota to
the accumulated memory.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, it’s you, Wolf!” exclaimed his mother, without
rising from her antimacassared chair, where, with a
volume of “The Trumpet-Major” open on her tea-tray,
she was sipping her tea. “How grave you look, my son!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She gave him a glowing smile as he sat down opposite
her. But he plunged at once into the dangerous
waters.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Are you really thinking of borrowing money from
that brute, Mother? You know it’s been worrying me a
lot.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She regarded him with eyes that gleamed with mischief.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why not?” she said. “I think the good man has grown
quite attached to me. I think he <span class='it'>likes</span> elderly ladies!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was too agitated to keep his seat. He began walking
up and down the room. Suddenly he stopped in front
of her. “Are you as happy down here, Mother, as you
were in London?” he said, looking down on that mocking,
invulnerable face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She settled herself in her chair, stretching out her
arms with an almost feline gesture of physical well-being.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I live in hope of greater happiness yet,” she murmured,
with a contented yawn. “Your mother’s an unregenerate
woman,” she went on, her words rising on
the breath of her yawn like fins on a smooth wave.
“She doesn’t take life as seriously as her ugly duckling
of a son!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He sighed and sat down again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But it’s a disgrace I can’t support you properly,
Mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“As well as your wife, Wolf? Sons who have to support
wives can’t tackle mothers too. You ought to have
thought of that six months ago.” The shamelessness of
her words was relieved by the ironic glint in her eyes.
“But you must have come to your mother’s defense at
any rate over that young lady of yours; for, when I met
her on the street three weeks ago, she stopped and talked
quite pleasantly to me! She told me you were still friends
with that bookseller girl; and I told <span class='it'>her</span> she was far too
pretty to be jealous of that melancholy little shadow.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf frowned, picked up “The Trumpet-Major,” put
it down again, and began nervously scratching its cover
with his fingernails. He thought to himself: “It’s absolutely
impossible to talk of any woman to another woman
without betraying the absent one. They must have blood!
Every word you speak is a betrayal. They’re not satisfied
otherwise.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>To turn the conversation from Gerda he launched out
at random.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wish Darnley would try and support a wife as well
as <span class='it'>his</span> mother! I hate to see anyone as decent as he is,
getting so little pleasure.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mattie, eh? What a boy you are! Legitimate .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
illegitimate .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you’re ready to look after them all! I
daresay you’re only waiting till my new flame, Mr. Manley,
starts me in my own shop, to give my twenty-five
pounds to this deserving couple!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s your idea, Mother, of how things are at Pond
Cottage? I don’t believe I’ve ever asked you that.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do you mean .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. how they are? A good but
very plain young woman and a good but very handsome
young man .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. isn’t that the whole situation? She’s in
love with him, of course; and he enjoys it. He’d do more
than enjoy it if her nose wasn’t so awfully like yours!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Will they marry in the end, do you suppose?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why not? Didn’t we agree he’s a <span class='it'>good</span> man? What’s
the use of a man being good if he can’t make a plain
face happy? Besides”—and the brown eyes laughed with
the gayest wickedness—“your sister’s got very pretty
legs!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf made a faint grimace and plunged into a different
topic.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you really tell Urquhart, Mother, that Monk had
threatened to kill him?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Solent laughed aloud. “Don’t start me on those
two, Wolf, or I’ll talk all the morning. Why, they set
on me as if they’d been a pair of savage goats that I’d
tried to separate. Monk was rude. Mr. Urquhart wasn’t
rude; but he’ll never forgive me.” She laughed again, the
gay, mischievous, rippling laughter of a young girl. “I
had the best hit all the same; and I’m glad I did!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What did you say, Mother?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I told him he ought to set a trap for that fox in the
churchyard!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why was that a hit, Mother?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, you know! Anything about Redfern.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It
bothered him that he couldn’t tell what I’d heard or what
I hadn’t heard. As a matter of fact, Roger Monk told me
there wasn’t a night he didn’t go rambling about. <span class='it'>I</span> don’t
think anything of that. I like night-walking myself. But
I knew it would be a hit!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf looked at his mother with frowning brows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But, Mother, Mother; don’t you ever take anything
seriously?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I take my tea-shop seriously,” she said, with a mock-tragic
air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf sighed. “Sometimes I’ve fancied, Mother, that
you’d got some secret philosophy of your own that made
you wiser than anyone .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. wise as some great sorceress.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your father thought me a hard, selfish, conventional
woman, without an idea in her head. And that’s what I
probably am at bottom, Wolf!” She paused, and her face
grew flinty. “I can never forgive him for destroying our
life. What’s the use of that sort of folly? What’s the
use of tilting against conventions? It’s more amusing,
it’s more interesting, to play with those things. They’re
as real as anything else.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do you actually want out of life, then,
Mother?” His tone was naïve and pedantic. And he
<span class='it'>felt</span> naïve and pedantic, as he looked at this woman, the
contours of whose countenance were as defiant to ordinary
emotions as dark, slippery rocks to the wash of the
sea.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She startled him then by suddenly rising to her feet
with a movement that seemed to shake off twenty years
as if they were nothing. “I want happiness!” she cried.
“I want a lovely, thrilling, beautiful life. I want adventures,
travel, noble society. Oh, I don’t want to be shut
up all day long in Preston Lane, Blacksod!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She turned her back upon him and surveyed her own
face in the little plush-framed mirror over the mantelpiece.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Our friend Selena used to tell me I was a woman of
the world .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and I am! I am! What else should anyone
be, I should like to know?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She put her fingers to her cheeks and began tracing
their lines as if she were an angry sculptor, feeling for
the mistakes of her work.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I want to drive down the streets of Vienna! I want
to float down the canals of Venice! I want to see Paris,
Amsterdam, Constantinople!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf stared at the strong back in its neat tailor-made
jacket. He stared at the loose coils of wavy grey hair;
and an odd sensation went through him, as if this extraordinary
person were a complete stranger to him. He
began to feel that the moment was tense and even dangerous.
What a fool he’d been to disturb such ocean-deep
waters!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Presently she swung round upon him. “I suppose you
never thought,” she cried in a high-pitched voice, “that
I wanted anything more than to be the mother of a well-meaning
ninny!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mother dear .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. my dear mother .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” he faltered,
dominated so completely by the woman’s formidable
paroxysm as to feel as if she were towering above him in
that funny little room, and above the whole of Blacksod.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But she controlled herself now with a suddenness as
unexpected as her outburst had been.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all right, Wolf. I only wanted to be petted up
a little,” she murmured gently, moving to the table and
beginning with agile fingers to pile the breakfast-things
on her tray. “I expect I’ve worked myself into a fuss by
reading Thomas Hardy! One day you shall take me down
to Weymouth and we’ll walk over to the White Horse and
the Trumpet-Major’s village. Yes, and we’ll go in and
see who’s living in Penn House now, where your grandmother
was. You’d like that, wouldn’t you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf nodded; but he did not smile. “If I give her
every penny of what I get from Urquhart, will it be
enough?” he thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Listen, Mother,” he said aloud. “I’m going to walk
over to King’s Barton presently to call on the Squire.
You’ll smile, but I have practically decided to finish that
book for him. I can work at it at home with the notes
he’s made. I could get it done in about three months.
It’s absurd to be too——” He stopped abruptly, irritated,
in spite of his anticipation of that very thing, by
the gleam of sardonic mischief upon his mother’s face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The truth is, Mother,” he went on, “I’d much sooner
get this money for you from Urquhart than that you
should fall under this brute’s thumb!” It was the teasing
indulgence in her smile that made him use this crude
expression. The sight of the malicious glint still radiating
from her eyes drove him to add, “Will two hundred be
enough, Mother?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her expression became so extremely mock-sentimental
at this, that he was completely nonplussed. She even
tilted her head a little to one side, just as she had done
when she quoted the “Pot of Basil” by Redfern’s grave.
Then she laid down her tray and rested one of her hands
upon the chimneypiece.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Perhaps .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it would .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. be .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. enough,” she
said slowly, giving him a long, hard, penetrating look,
out of which all sentiment had fled. Then she added,
while a dusky red spot appeared in each of her cheeks,
“Don’t you see that I’ve got it in me to make a success
of this thing and stand on my own feet?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She paused and stared into the fire, biting her under-lip
in concentrated thought, and drawing two of her
finger-tips along the edge of the mantelpiece. Then she
suddenly burst out:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t you see it’s a life of my own I want, now you’ve
deserted me? I’ve lived in the thought of something exciting
that you’d do for both of us, but”—and she made
a dramatic gesture with her strong shoulders—“you
won’t do anything .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. any more than <span class='it'>he</span> did.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, Mother,” said Wolf slowly, when her final
outburst had spent itself and a tender whimsical smile
had settled down upon her face, “I’m off now, anyway,
to see Urquhart. That’s <span class='it'>something</span> to have decided upon,
at any rate, isn’t it? Oh, I shall get more competent and
more unscrupulous, if you give me time. Well, I’m off,
so good-bye, Mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was at this juncture, after a hurried tap at the door,
that Mrs. Herbert appeared upon the scene, to carry off
her lodger’s tray.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Can you manage it?” Wolf said politely, balancing a
forgotten sugar-bowl among the rest of the things. But
his mother came towards him, and, standing with her
back to the landlady, made a whimsical grimace. As he
bent forward to embrace her, there was a furtive exchange
between them of that rapid blood-understanding
which human beings share with the animals; but even
as she kissed him she whispered in his ear: “Don’t you
think any more about the money, Wolf, for I won’t have
it! And look me up tomorrow, if you have time, either
here or at the shop. Good-bye! Don’t you bother, Mrs.
Herbert! I’ll open the door.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he made his way through the quiet Sunday morning
streets, Wolf found that he had already decided, in
the secret places of his mind, to look in at Christie’s before
he started for King’s Barton. This decision quickened
his steps, but it did not prevent him from being
stared at with the usual vapid curiosity by the few lethargic
idlers he encountered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He tried to analyze, as he went along, the cause that
intensified this curiosity, in certain particular eye-encounters,
to a malignant hostility. He came to the
conclusion that this occurred only when his own mind
was especially harassed. It must be, he decided, the same
psychic instinct that makes a flock of fowls attack the
one that happens to be hurt or sick. Mentally, at such
times, he <span class='it'>was</span> hurt—he was actually bleeding invisible
blood—and it might easily be that this wounded “aura”
excited some mysterious irritation in those who caught it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he reached the Malakite shop he determined to
ring the side doorbell; and he entered the little alleyway
with this purpose. A certain shrinking from the
critical moment that would decide whether Christie were
in the house or not led him to gain time by strolling forward
into the small garden at the alley’s end.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little enclosure was entirely surrounded by walls;
and at that time of year the only greenery visible was a
few patches of parsley at the further end. Wolf walked
towards those patches, though the soaked earth-mould
clung heavily to his boots. Under the wall he did find a
couple of dilapidated chrysanthemums, little, drooping,
daisy-like blooms, that seemed to have had their very
souls washed out of them. Glancing upward above these,
he observed a projecting stone in the wall, which was
covered by a species of vividly green moss, small and
velvety, that seemed enjoying a vernal prime of its own,
in the midst of the universal dissolution. In a moment,
like a rush of warm summer air, there came sweeping
over his mind the memory of certain old pier-posts at
Weymouth, covered with small green seaweed .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and
simultaneously with this he heard a sound that made
him turn hurriedly towards the house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was the opening of the side-door. And there was
Christie, emerging in her out-of-doors attire!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He called her name loudly before he knew what he was
doing, and she turned and looked at him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>With the poignance of that vision of pier-post and
green seaweed still in his brain, the sight of her figure
there, so quaint and pitiful, in her old-fashioned cloak
and tightly-pulled-on gloves, stirred in him a sudden
sense of something so beautiful in life, that it melted
the bones within him. She herself seemed startled and
overjoyed at seeing him; and tossing aside her accustomed
reserve, she hurried towards him, heedless of the
rain-soaked soil under her feet, heedless of any windows
that might be overlooking them, her arms impetuously
stretched out and her mobile little face working under
her tremulous emotion like a ruffled leaf in a gusty wind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once in possession of her hand he defiantly retained
it; and together they moved close up to the wall at the
end of the enclosure, where, on their rain-battered stalks,
drooped those miserable chrysanthemums.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve come to the conclusion, Wolf,” she said, as they
stood there side by side, looking down at those forlorn
survivals, “that I must be more frank, as well as more
philosophical, about what I feel for you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His heart began to beat wildly. The fantastic idea
flashed through his mind that she was going to suggest—she
herself—that he should come to her one of these
nights when the old man was asleep!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What exactly do you mean, Chris?” he asked, as
she dropped his arm and faced him with her steady
stare.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m going to keep my feminine nature in control
after this,” she said. “We know what we are to each
other .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and what apparently we have to be .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so
I’ve decided not to allow any insurrection of my feelings.
I’ve even thought of a <span class='it'>coup d’état</span> to keep them in
their place!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Quite unconsciously she had lifted her free hand to
his coat and was twisting round and round in her gloved
fingers one of its buttons.</p>

<p class='pindent'>An electric vibration of understanding quivered between
them like a shivering cord stretched between two
boats balanced each on its own wave-crest. And then,
with incredible swiftness, a deliciously mocking smile
came into her face. “Shall I tell you something, Wolf?”
she said. “I’ve started writing a story! I began it at one
o’clock last night, when I decided to conquer all feminine
equivocations. It’s about someone quite different
from me, but .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very philosophical. It was the philosophical
part I began last night. I wrote page after page
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. quick as that!” And releasing his coat, she made a
characteristically girlish gesture with her fingers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I believe you could write a wonderful book,” said
Wolf earnestly; and then, almost before he was aware
of it, as they stood together, the indescribable entrancement
of that green seaweed he had visualized a moment
ago, and the salty taste of spray, and the touch of sun-warmed
sand that had come with it, associated themselves
with the delicious peace into which her presence
threw him, and he began to abandon himself to the ecstasy
of his “mythology.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was stupid enough to dream that he could give
himself up unobserved to this egoistic satisfaction. It
was therefore with something of a shock that he caught
the faint sound of a sigh upon the air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve got to go now,” she said. “I’ve got to get something
for Father’s dinner that I forgot yesterday, and
there’s only one little shop round here that’s open on
Sunday morning. But don’t let me drive you away if
you’re happy in my garden. Stay as long as you like!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was holding out her hand now and upon her face
was a candidly humorous smile. He knew perfectly well
that she had discovered, without the passage of a sign
between them, that his mind had plunged their paradisic
moment into some undersea of its own, where she could
not follow. But he saw that she accepted this with complete
indulgence; just took it for granted as a masculine
peculiarity .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a different way from hers of being
happy!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“When am I to see you again?” he asked. “Our school-holiday
will soon be over .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and then .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. well, we
know how it goes!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie turned her head away from him, and, with
puckered forehead and drooping under-lip, fell into a
fit of deep pondering.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now’s the time for you to practise your new philosophy,
Chris, of being frank with your lover!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf uttered this lightly, but his heart was beginning
to beat again. Something had made him give to her
confessed “decision” a meaning directly the reverse of
what her words implied. Wicked, satyrish thoughts
flashed through his mind like darting fish through disturbed
water. Her frown deepened at his speech and her
lip drooped still more. Then, with heightened colour,
she turned quickly and faced him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Will .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. be——” she began slowly. “I
mean, will Gerda be——” She hesitated; and then,
speaking rapidly, and with wide-open eyes fixed steadily
upon his: “Will you be free tomorrow night, Wolf?
Father is going down to Weymouth tomorrow, on some
affair of his own, and is going to stay the night there.
So, if you like, I could get you supper, and we’d have
everything to ourselves.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was Wolf’s turn now to look away; but he answered
her easily and lightly, as if it were quite a small matter.
“Why, Chris, that would be wonderful! I’ll snatch at
such a chance as that, whatever’s in the way. Besides,
there’s no earthly reason why I shouldn’t come to supper
tomorrow. So let’s consider it settled. No, I mustn’t stay
longer now; and I mustn’t try and help you with your
Sunday shopping! I’m off to Barton to see if I can’t
catch Urquhart at home.” He paused for a second. “I’m
thinking of finishing that book for him, you know .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
after all .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. if he’ll pay me in advance.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Perhaps never in his life had Wolf’s mind moved as
rapidly as it moved now. His consciousness at this moment
became like a wild horse stung by a gadfly or like
an ox driven crazy by the eating of some “insane root.”
Those words of hers, “Father is going to stay the night
there,” took to themselves a sweet-shivering identity of
their own. But his cheeks were flushed with a queer sense
of discord within himself. “What I feel now,” he thought,
“is not happiness at all. <span class='it'>What is it?</span>” And then, as the
two of them moved away over the wet sods of earth to the
alley’s entrance: “That green moss .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that green seaweed
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>was</span> happiness; but this is something else.
This is something that will kill my ‘mythology’ if I let
it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was taking her hand now to say good-bye. “What
does she care,” he thought, “about my doing Urquhart’s
book?” And there came over him, as he looked into her
brown eyes, a cold shudder of deadly loneliness. “She
would never understand,” he thought, “what I am risking
by going back to Urquhart.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, good-bye, Chris, till tomorrow night!” And
then, as they released each other’s hands, “You’re not
to look round now!” he added querulously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve never looked round in my life!” retorted Christie
Malakite, as she gave him her parting nod.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was still about half-an-hour before church-time when
he reached the gate of King’s Barton Vicarage. And
there was T. E. Valley himself, in his ragged brown
ulster, scraping with a hoe at one side of the drive!</p>

<p class='pindent'>For a moment Wolf found himself enjoying the lot of
this little clergyman. <span class='it'>He</span> had no worries about girls.
<span class='it'>He</span> had no worries about money. <span class='it'>He</span> had no mother but
the Mother of God.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf advanced slowly up the drive. The click of the
hoe on the gravel made so much noise that his approach
was unobserved.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Valley’s green-tinted trousers—he thinks nothing
of Sunday, thought Wolf—covered such lean flanks,
as he stooped, that it was as if the trousers were doing
the weeding rather than the man.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-morning, Valley! Not started ringing your bell
yet, then?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A twinge of physical discomfort, as he resumed his
upright position, crossed the priest’s face. He rubbed his
spine with the back of his left hand, as he offered his
right to his visitor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stiff. I feel rather stiff, Solent. You must excuse my
being stiff.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf sighed wearily. “I’ve been envying you, you
irresponsible monk.” He turned his head and surveyed the
result of Mr. Valley’s labour. A small path had been
made free of weeds along the edge of the great overgrown
drive.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“People won’t follow your path, Valley, even if you
carry it to the gate. They’ll just walk straight up the
middle.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Disregarding this remark, the clergyman screwed up
his eyes as if thinking of some important matter. Then
he leaned forward and said gravely:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“By the way, Solent, do you know any literary people
in London?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf surveyed him in astonishment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, a few,” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A smile like a tiny crack in grey pond-ice crossed Mr.
Valley’s pallid features.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why don’t you get them to publish Jason’s poems,
then? They’re good, aren’t they? He won’t show them to
me. You know what he is! He thinks I’d steal the ideas
for my sermons. But if your London friends were to
see them——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt sheer amazement at the perspicacity of the
little man. What a fool he’d been not to have ever
thought of this! Of course, it must be exceedingly difficult
to get anything published. Carfax might—he had
an interest once in a publishing-house. And they <span class='it'>are</span>——</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll talk to Jason about it,” he said gravely. “Well,
I must be off now. I’m going to see Urquhart. By the
way, Valley, I <span class='it'>am</span> going to finish that book of his.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Valley’s face crumpled into woeful disorder, as
if he had received a blow. He turned up his shirt-sleeves
and resumed his weeding, without a word.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf experienced extreme discomfort.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You think I’m making a mistake, Valley?” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was no answer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You think the less I see of Urquhart the better, Valley?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Still there was no answer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t work at that job too long, Valley, and forget
about the service!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man gave him an extraordinary sideways glance
without lifting his head or ceasing his work. But not a
word did he utter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, good-bye .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and I <span class='it'>will</span> do something about
Jason’s poems!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wonder if I <span class='it'>am</span> making the greatest mistake I ever
made in my life!” he said to himself, as he emerged
into the road. He began to feel almost startled by the
blind desire he had to erect this money as an impassable
barrier between his mother and Mr. Manley. “It’s
only his money. <span class='it'>Of course</span> it’s only his money. She
couldn’t <span class='it'>like</span> a brute like that!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In spite of the lowering clouds hanging like toppling
bastions above High Stoy—as if the Cerne Giant himself
were heaping up earthworks there—not one single
drop fell till Wolf reached the shelter of the Manor. He
began to feel there was something uncanny about the
way the rain threatened to descend and yet did not
descend.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s the time, Roger?” he asked, nervously, as he
followed Monk up the old Jacobean staircase to the familiar
library.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Must be near church-time, I believe, Sir; though I
haven’t heard the bells yet. Squire’ll be main glad to see
’ee, Sir,” the man went on, as he opened the library-door;
“glad as a hernshaw Squire’ll be!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He wants to get his book done, Monk, I suppose?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tis all he thinks of, Sir. Night and day, ’tis all he
thinks of.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why doesn’t he advertise for another secretary?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Roger Monk made a deprecatory grimace and then
hurriedly placed his large first-finger upon his lips.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Squire’s had enough of secretaries,” he whispered,
“and so, by Grimey, have I!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His voice resumed its normal tone when they were
well inside the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll find your old seat just as comfortable as it
used to be, Sir. Them big logs warms the whole place.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>On the servant’s departure Wolf went over at once to
the table by the window. How well he recalled the thrill
he used to get from the asters and lobelias, down there
in that round flower-bed, so dark and bare today!</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a book, lying with others upon the table,
that caught his attention at once. He picked it up. The
particular pencil-marking in the corner of the fly-leaf
indicated to him that it had come into Urquhart’s possession
through the agency of Mr. Malakite. The volume
had no connection at all with the rambling chronicles
and scandalous County-Trials out of which Urquhart’s
History was being framed. It was the kind of book the
debased purpose of which is simply and solely to play
upon the morbid erotic nerves of unbalanced sensuality.
The Malakite shop had, it appeared, inexhaustible resources
of this nature, distinct altogether from any merely
bawdy local folk-lore.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned over the pages. At once that old wicked
shiver, drunken, indescribable, ran through his veins.
It was an abominable book! A peculiar tremulousness
took possession of the pit of his stomach, and a mist
swam before his eyes. The atrocious attraction of a single
page that he had encountered drew him towards a region
of unspeakable images. Through an iridescent vapour,
with the blood rushing to his head, he followed those
images. He sank down into the chair, with the book
clutched between his trembling fingers. He read voraciously.
All those drops of deadly nightshade which, four
months ago, had distilled themselves into his nerves as
he fled from the school-treat field, began to seethe and
ferment again in his secretest veins. Every now and then
he was compelled to wipe away the salt sweat that
clouded his eyesight. His knees knocked together beneath
the table in his absorbed emotion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was while he was thus engaged that the library-door
opened upon him and Mr. Urquhart presented himself
in the doorway. The Squire advanced towards him
across the polished oak floor, limping and muttering,
his cane striking the echoing boards resoundingly at
each step.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf rose and met the man with extended hand; but
his flushed cheeks, hot forehead, and excited eyes must
have betrayed his preoccupation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Glancing at our last purchase, eh? What? Can’t
keep these pretty little books out of you young people’s
hands! You’ll be snatching, by hook or by crook.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
You’ll be snatching, you rogues, eh?” And he dropped
Wolf’s fingers, only to nudge him familiarly in the
ribs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart looked that morning as if something
had inordinately refreshed and cheered him. “Well?”
he muttered interrogatively. “Well?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf retreated a step or two, and mechanically placed
the book he had been reading on the top of another
volume, adjusting it evenly and neatly. Then, with his
clenched hand resting on the table, and leaning a little
forward, “I’ve been thinking, Sir,” he began gravely,
“a good deal lately about that book of yours; and I’ve
thought I’d like to see you again to find out if we could
come .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. if we could come .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To business, me boy!” threw in the other. “Quite
right. I’m your man. I’m ready to bargain with ’ee.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s eyes fixed themselves upon the ebony stick
upon which his late employer propped himself. “As it
happens, Sir,” he began resolutely, “my mother is just
now in need of a sum of money .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. two hundred
pounds in fact .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to start a new tea-shop in Blacksod.
She wants this at once. She’s been thinking of borrowing
it from .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. from a friend. What I had in my mind,
Sir, was .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” He relaxed the tension of his muscles a
little at this point, and, in place of leaning heavily on
the table, he found himself scratching with his thumbnail
a zigzag pattern upon it in the shape of an architectural
ornament. “What I thought was,” he went on,
“that if you could see your way to give me a cheque
for this sum .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. now at once .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I would pledge myself,
in any form you suggest, to get the book finished
within the next three months .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. by March, in fact,
when I first began it. What you’ll be doing, Mr. Urquhart,
is to pay me in advance for this three months’
work on condition that I finish the job in that time .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
but I must be free”—his voice became quite steady now,
and he found himself looking at last into the Squire’s
face—“I must be free to do this work at home and in
my own way, using your notes, of course, as my material.
I mean, that with my school-teaching I can’t come over
here regularly. But if I haven’t finished it by the end
of March you’ll have the right to demand the repayment
of this two hundred.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He paused, a little breathlessly; and, as was his wont
in any crisis, he put his hand into his side-pocket, produced
his cigarettes, and lit one with punctilious deliberation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come over to the fire, Solent,” said Mr. Urquhart.
Wolf followed him, as he limped across the room; and
they sat down in the two leather chairs against the open
hearth, the smouldering logs of which the Squire proceeded
to stir up with the end of his stick.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s heart was now beating fast. “I shall have the
two hundred,” he thought. “I shall have the two hundred!”
He became aware that the vision of himself
handing over this cheque to his mother was melting now
into a vague, delicious sweetness that had nothing to do
with either Mrs. Solent or with Mr. Urquhart. It hung
quivering—this drop of maddening sweetness—on the
edge of those words of Christie’s, “He will stay the night
at Weymouth!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m not a rich man, Solent. You know <span class='it'>that</span>, I suppose?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf nodded sympathetically; but he caught no more
than the general drift of his companion’s words, as
the Squire rambled on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s a plucky woman, your mother, and a darned
good-looking one still, me boy, if you’ll let an old man
say so. Shame you had to desert her. But you nympholepts
are all crazy. It’s beyond me what you can find—— But
there! It’s a matter of taste. But I don’t see why you
need have bought the filly as well as ridden her. Torp’s
a reasonable man; though he <span class='it'>is</span> such a fool. But there.
We all have to pay for our little vices. Well! About the
two hundred, me boy—I suppose you must have it. Yes,
by Jove, Solent, and you <span class='it'>shall</span> have it! And what’s more,
we’ll drink a glass of my old Malmsey to wash the
business down!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>While these words were reaching him across the smoke
of the stirred-up logs, Wolf’s own consciousness was
sounding the depths of an unexpected mental crisis. Intensely
did he realize the relief with which he would
fling this cheque into his mother’s lap. It was against his
conscience; but the moment had come when he must
sacrifice his conscience! In an irresistible salt-tide, overcoming
all barriers, the idea of sacrificing his conscience
rushed in full force now over the portion of his mind
where the words, “Mr. Malakite at Weymouth,” lay like
a drowned sea-reef! And then, as he stared at Mr.
Urquhart, it became clear to him in a flash of cruel illumination
that these two things—today’s bargain with
the Squire and tomorrow’s visit to Christie—would be
the end of his peace of mind. To these two things had
he been brought at last. This was the issue; this was the
climax of the mounting wave of his life in Dorset. He
had to outrage now—and it was too late to retreat—the
very core of his nature! That hidden struggle between
some mysterious Good and some mysterious Evil, into
which all his ecstasies had merged, how could it go on
after this?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do ’ee hear, me boy?” The Squire’s voice came clear
and straight now into his agitated consciousness. “Will
you do me the favour of ringing the bell? There! Just
in front of ’ee!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf rose and rang the bell, and sank down once
more into the depths of the leather chair. As he did so he
was aware of a rattling at both the mullioned casements.
The wind was rising, then? Let it rise! Let the rain pour
down. It would please Mukalog, in his kitchen-drawer
over there, to hear this sound.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tall gardener had his black coat on when he entered
the room, and his air was the air of a privileged
major-domo in a noble house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Get my paper and pens, Roger, and my cheque-book,
out of my study, please. Oh, and one thing more! Here,
you’ll want my keys for that”—and he began fumbling
in his pockets.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A bottle of port, Sir?” suggested the servant.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where the devil <span class='it'>are</span> my keys?” murmured the Squire
petulantly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“In your dressing-gown, I expect, Sir. I’ll look for
them, Sir. Is it the 1880 port that I’m to get?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Listen, Monk,” said Mr. Urquhart gravely. “How
many bottles of my father’s Malmsey have I got left?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man straightened his back with a jerk, and Wolf
noticed that his eyebrows went up as if some extravagant
and very foolish transaction were in the air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Some half-a-dozen, Sir. Them what’s in the walnut
chest are the last. We locked them up, sir, after Candlemas
night, when you and young Mr. Redfern looked
at they portfolios of antiquities.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart gave Wolf a rapid but very complicated
glance as he answered the man.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Never mind about the antiquities, Monk. Mr. Solent
doesn’t care for antiquities. Get a bottle of the Malmsey,
and bring my cheque-book.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Half-an-hour later, over the same fireplace, Wolf
found himself drinking the most nectareous wine he had
ever tasted in his life. A cheque for two hundred pounds
on Stuckey’s Bank lay securely in his waistcoat-pocket;
and on the silver tray between Mr. Urquhart and himself,
a corner of it beneath the decanter to keep it in its place,
was his own acknowledgement of the money and of the
obligation which it entailed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Fifteen chapters would be a good round number, Mr.
Urquhart.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Fifteen .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. thirty .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. fifty!” cried the other. “I
don’t care how many! Order it as you please. My <span class='it'>facts</span>,
my little <span class='it'>facts</span>, are the main thing—that future generations
should have all the biting, pricking, itching, salty
little facts about our ‘wold Dorset’ that can be put together!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I won’t have any of your ‘facts,’ Sir, that I can’t turn
into decent English. This book may carry your name, but
it will have my soul between its——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He broke off abruptly. “What’s amusing you, Mr.
Urquhart? By God, I <span class='it'>will</span> hear what’s amusing you! Have
I said anything ridiculous?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. at .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. all .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. me boy!” gasped the
Squire, suppressing his chuckling-fit. “Did you say your
‘soul’ between its pages? ‘Soul’ is good. ‘Soul’ is a good
word. So you’ve got a soul, have you, Menelaus? Or
you <span class='it'>had</span> before it strayed into my book? By Jove, that’s
a pretty fancy, eh? Like a rose-leaf or a bit of white
heather, such as the wenches put in their prayer-books!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf laid his hand on the stem of his wine-glass and
stared sombrely at the rich purplish umber of its contents.
Never had he tasted such wine! He felt irritated
with Urquhart for not letting him enjoy it in silence—savour
every drop of it—draw it into his heart, his
nerves, his spirit.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not one fact left out .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Menelaus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that’s in
the bond, you know!” And Wolf, through that Malmsey-tinctured
mist, saw his host tap significantly with his
forefinger the sheet of paper that lay under the decanter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A second gust of rising wind rattled the two window-casements;
and this time there came with it the sound
of a distant bell ringing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s Tilly-Valley,” said the Squire brusquely. “Hand
me your glass, Solent.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Does he have it done when he’s saying Mass?” asked
Wolf, watching the tilting of the decanter. Then he
cried, “I like to hear it!” with a sudden, fierce emphasis.
“I think I’ll open the window.” He rose with meticulous
care and moved across the room, lifting his legs
with cautious exactitude, as if they were heavy objects
totally distinct from his personality.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He pushed open that familiar latched pane of the mullioned
window.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I say, Sir!” he cried excitedly. “It’s going to pour
with rain. There’s an enormous black cloud out there!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He strode gravely back to his place by the fire; and
the wind followed him, making that paper he had signed
rise up like a leaf and tap against the side of the decanter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s going to pour in a minute,” he repeated, emptying
his glass.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But he now became aware that his companion’s wits
had completely succumbed to the influence of the wine.
Mr. Urquhart was engaged in a fatuous attempt to measure
out the last few drops of the Malmsey equally between
their two glasses. “Empty .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. quite empty .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
he murmured, with a deep sigh; and then he began muttering
something that sounded like “Who’ll toll the bell?
‘I’ said the bull, ‘because I can pull.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I beg your pardon, Mr. Urquhart?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His recognition that the man had sunk instantaneously
through all the intervening stages and was now hopelessly
drunk was a sobering shock to his own fuddled
mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s ringing still,” he remarked gravely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m the only magistrate round here,” cried the Squire.
“What does Torp know of the law?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf contemplated with some concern the heavy lips
in front of him, which were now gibbering incoherently.
Valley’s Mass-bell had ceased. The wind was rattling
all the windows. A wild gust, blowing down the chimney,
drove a handful of bitter-tasting wood-ashes against both
their faces.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I told you three feet was enough, what’s that to
you? Three feet is deep enough for a boy not twenty-five.
They sleep sound then. It’s different later. Three
feet is a very good depth. Don’t throw in any more, I
tell you! His skin was always soft. Three feet is
more than enough. How do we know they don’t feel it
falling on ’em? It’s clay, mind you. It’s thick Dorset
clay.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf drew in his breath with a long-drawn sigh. “He’ll
tell me everything soon, if only I can keep my wits
clear.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a sharp splash of rain against the open
casement, and a violent shaking of the window-catch.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Squire recommenced his mutterings.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“D’ye think it’s an easy thing to walk up and down
on the earth with him lying down there? What would
it be to stop thinking about it and just do it? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Foulness?
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Abomination? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I don’t know about
that.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. don’t .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. know.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His voice died away into complete incoherence. But
suddenly it rose once more, shrill and strident. “It falls
off .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it falls off .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the sweet flesh!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf stiffened himself in his chair and leant forward.
Big drops of rain were descending the chimney, each one
hissing with an angry hiss, as it touched the burning logs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The lips .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the lips .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. where are his lips now?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man’s voice sank again; but Wolf seemed to catch
a low, moaning sound coming from him, a strange, subhuman
sound, that was ghastly to listen to.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then there were more articulate words. “Nothing can
make him not to be himself! And if he’s himself, and
I’m <span class='it'>myself</span>, ’twould be like my life hugging my life to
do it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He fell into a silence then; and lifting one of his arms
from where it sprawled upon the table, he wiped the
saliva from his mouth with the back of his hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll find out everything in a moment,” Wolf thought.
“All I’ve got to do is to keep my brain clear.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The windows had become so dark with rain that the
room was in twilight. The upper portion of his companion’s
face was almost invisible. Over the lower part
of it, however, the smouldering fire threw a wavering
illumination. It was this obscuring of the man’s eyes in
the darkened room that made it a surprise to Wolf when,
after a long pause, a voice came from him that was
pitched in a completely different key—that was, indeed,
crafty and foxy in its sobriety!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Drunk and chattering, eh, me boy? It’s when I think
of Torp .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that’s what it is .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Torp and the mess he
made of the grave out there! Couldn’t even dig it deep
enough. Said he came upon an old coffin or something.
Torp and his stupidity always upset me. A stone-cutter
is what the man is. I was a fool to let him meddle with
grave-digging. Torp digging graves is absurd. You can
see <span class='it'>that</span> for yourself, tow-pate, can’t you, even though
you do go about with Lobbie? What was I saying just
now? Oh, I know! That it was all crazy village-gossip
when they talk of suicide. Don’t you listen to ’em, tow-pate!
Don’t you listen to that ridiculous individual down
at Pond Cottage either. He takes drugs, that man. You
can smell ’em on his clothes. Suicide? Nonsense. It
was pneumonia. If he’d stayed at Lenty, Tilly-Valley
would never have got at him. They moved him against
my wishes. D’ye hear, Solent? Against my wishes. That
Lenty place of mine .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. your mother liked it, didn’t
she? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. was just right for that boy. What did they
move him for? He wasn’t fit to be moved. He might have
got well if they’d kept Tilly-Valley away from him and
hadn’t moved him. That .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. was .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. wrong .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to
move .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>With these words Mr. Urquhart’s heavy head sank
down till his chin rested against his chest. The shock
of the jerk to his neck aroused him again, however; and
with a crafty, wrinkled leer he glanced at the empty bottle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Empty .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. every drop,” he muttered. Then, with
his elbow resting on the table, he supported his head
with his hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Torp’s the fellow who upsets me. Why, I can dig a
grave better myself! But you must excuse me, Solent.
I know you are mixed up with those people. Married the
little boy, I mean the little girl, didn’t you? Your relative
Torp is a prize fool, Solent. Don’t defend him!
I tell you it’s no use. You’re .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a sensible .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. boy
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Menelaus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. though you’re <span class='it'>not</span> as good-looking
as your father .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and the best thing you can do is to
leave Torp to me. Stone-cutter or undertaker, I understand
him. I’ve known individuals of his kind all my
life. He’s pure Dorset, is the good Torp. Leave him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
to me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. leave .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His arm sank down upon the table and his head sank
down upon his arm. A gust of wind from the open window
swept across the room and lifted into a spiral dance
the scattered wood-ashes that lay on the silver tray.
Some of those ashes, as they subsided, fell upon the
man’s glossy black hair and lay there where they fell;
so that Wolf was reminded of the men of old time, who,
in their grief, strewed ashes on their heads.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rose quietly to his feet. “I’d better hunt for Monk
before I go,” he thought, “and tell him to come up and
see him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>With this in his mind he stole across the polished floor,
opened the door with the utmost caution, and let himself
out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The rain had stopped when he emerged into the manor-garden;
and he decided that the best thing he could do
would be to walk off the effects of the Malmsey and remain
in the open air until tea-time. Then he would drop
in at Pond Cottage, where, no doubt, since it was Sunday,
he would find all his friends together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>By the elimination of any lunch he would be all the
hungrier to enjoy the home-made bread and flaky Scotch
scones and honey-in-the-honeycomb which always made
Mrs. Otter’s teas such solid and delicious repasts.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Feeling a longing for absolute solitude, he looked
about for some unfrequented path. He had not passed,
by more than two hundred yards, the well-known house
inhabited by Roger Monk, when he came upon a cattle-drove
leading due east, which was completely unfamiliar.
This he decided to explore; and when it led him into a
narrow, grassy lane, heading towards High Stoy, he made
up his mind that he would follow this new direction and
see what came of it. Every now and then, as he walked,
he found himself thrusting his finger and thumb into his
waistcoat-pocket to make sure the precious slip of paper
was still safely there.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had never been quite in the mood in which he
struggled now. The thought of Christie’s invitation to
him, the tone of her voice as she uttered the words about
her father, the expression of her face as she described
what she had been writing—all these things fermented
in his veins like drops from the sap of a deadly upas-tree.
To die without ever having slept with Christie .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
No! He <span class='it'>couldn’t</span> submit to such a destiny! His heart
beat fast as he gathered up his forces for this challenge
to the gods. Between the bare branches of rain-soaked
elms and the wet leaves of gleaming holly he strode along
now like a centaur maddened by juniper-berries! And
yet all the while, below this recklessness, lay a furtive,
troubled, ghastly dread. Did not his “mythology” depend
upon his inmost life-illusion—upon his taking the
side of Good against Evil in the great occult struggle?
And if Urquhart’s book and “Mr. Malakite at Weymouth”
killed his mythology, how could he go on living? What
feelings does a man have when his inmost integrity is
shattered? “You Dorset!” he murmured aloud, as he
trailed his stick through a heap of dead leaves. “You’ve
not beaten me yet, you Dorset! Ay! I’ll be a match for
you yet, you dark rain-scented earth!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But even as he spoke, the thought of holding Christie
against his limbs, stripped of her clothes, brought him an
intolerable spasm. The words, “Mr. Malakite at Weymouth,”
ceased altogether to be words. They became tiny
blue veins just above those slender knees! They became—oh,
he couldn’t give up such a chance! He couldn’t!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had let Christie become a spirit to him. He himself,
with his Pharisaic chatter about “Platonic,” had
turned her into a spirit. Men of his type make their
girls into anything. He had made her what he wanted
her. He had satisfied his sensuality with the other one and
gone to Christie for mental sympathy. He hadn’t considered
<span class='it'>her</span> side of it at all. But now—tomorrow night—he
would be a magician! He would turn this Ariel, this
Elemental, into a living girl! His mind reverted to
Gerda. “How pitiful that she should have lost her blackbird-song!
That’s what I’ve done to <span class='it'>her</span>! I’ve become too
solemn. I’ve wearied her with my pedantic, ponderous
thoughts. She’s come to feel that I’m ‘heavy weather,’
a fellow without humour, without gaiety, a lumbering
schoolmaster. That’s what it is. She’s turned to Weevil,
for the simplest of all reasons—for pleasant camaraderie!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly, with a cynical frankness, he began comparing
his feelings for these two girls. “The truth is,” he
said to himself, “I love them both! I love Gerda because
she’s so simple, and because I’ve slept with her all these
months; and I love Christie because she’s so subtle, and
because I’ve never slept with her!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He paused by the lane-side, and, stepping over some
dripping clumps of rank weeds, whose odour seemed like
all the vague, anonymous scents that had hit his senses
for the last four months, he leaned upon a disused gate
and stared northward towards Ramsgard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is that the Abbey?” he thought, as he heard faint
chimes upon the heavy air. Hovering about the image of
Æthelwolf’s coffin, his mind reverted to the idea of
Christ.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How extraordinary it would be,” he said to himself,
“if there really were an incredibly tender and pitiful
heart .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. tender to the craziest sentimentalities as well
as to the most tragic dilemmas of humanity .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just outside
the circle of time and space!” If there <span class='it'>were</span> such a
heart it would certainly turn all modern scientific theories
into something trifling and unimportant. But did he
want such a Being to exist? Not to want him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. not
even to <span class='it'>want</span> him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. would seem an outrageous cruelty
to all the Tilly-Valleys in the world. And, besides, such a
Being would look after Gerda and after Christie .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
and settle all their dilemmas .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ultimately .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “And
yet I don’t believe I <span class='it'>do</span> want Him!” he murmured aloud,
as a sprinkling of cold raindrops fell upon his clasped
hands from a tree above his head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he set himself to answer the question, why it was
he didn’t “want Him,” there came into his mind one of
Gerda’s recent hints, full of her primitive Blacksod mania
for gross scandal, implying that the perverse tendencies
of Mr. Malakite had not even yet been eradicated by old
age.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I take her tomorrow night,” he thought, “there’ll
exist .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. something .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in common .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. between the
old man and me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. yes! if it’s only a .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. only a .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Is that the reason why I don’t really want ‘Him’ to
exist? For fear my feeling for Christie should have to be
a thing purer even than ‘Platonic’?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stared frowningly at the stubble-furrows in front of
him. One especial little pool of water caught his attention,
between the melancholy stalks, into whose bosom
at intervals single drops, from an extended branch above,
kept splashing. So this was the inmost law of nature, was
it; that if a man had more than one woman in his life
he sank of necessity to such base compromises that he
<span class='it'>couldn’t</span> want Christ to exist?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Well, he must content himself with thinking of the
coffin of King Æthelwolf when he heard the chimes of
Ramsgard!</p>

<p class='pindent'>In his defiantly heathen mood he suddenly found himself
chuckling, as he stared at those little periodic water-tongues
leaping up in that brown puddle; for he recalled
the opinion that Bob Weevil had expressed to
him recently, that girls’ legs were the most beautiful
thing in the world. “Weevil and I are both lucky in one
way,” he thought. “We both have the sort of intense
life-illusion that protects human beings from the futility
of the commonplace. But, oh God, oh God! I wish
I hadn’t taken this two hundred pounds, and I wish
Mr. Malakite <span class='it'>wasn’t</span> going to Weymouth tomorrow!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He lifted his eyes from the wet stubble and let them
roam at large across the green expanse of the great vale.
And there swept over him an immense loathing for the
furtive indecencies of human life and beast life upon the
earth. “It would be so much better,” he thought, “if all
men and all beasts were wiped out, and only birds and
fishes left! Everything that copulates, everything that carries
its young, how good if it vanished in one great catastrophe
from the earth, leaving only the feathered and
the finned!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And he tried deliberately, as he moved away from that
disused gate and strode further eastward along the lane,
to visualize all this patient Sabbath landscape as it would
be if it were indeed washed clean of all mammals! He
imagined the vast cirque of Poll’s Camp, couchant like
an heraldic lion, and befouled no more by the rabble of
Blacksod. He saw Melbury Bub rising out of the calm
rain-drenched fields, free from all the privies and dung-heaps
and Farmer’s Rests and slaughter-sheds that so
profaned its leafy purlieus.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The lane rose a little presently, following a slight undulation
of the bed of the vale; and when he reached the
top of this small eminence, the expanse of country that
stretched before him assumed for his imagination that
particular look of a land submerged under fathoms of
transparent water, which, from his childhood up, had
especially thrilled him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>To his left rose the corrugated trunk of an enormous
elm-tree, about whose roots a thick covering of green
moss held the fallen rain like a sponge.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sight of this moss swept his mind back to Christie’s
garden and thence to those slippery wharf-steps and
wave-swept pier-posts that he associated with the first discovery
of his mystic ecstasy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>So absolutely did he live in symbols of his mental
life, that the two things which now threatened this ecstasy—Urquhart’s
book and a shy, slender Christie,
stripped of her clothes—transformed themselves into the
wet, uneven bark of this trunk against which he now
pressed his hand. “Two hundred pounds?” he thought.
“What is that to spoil a whole life? A thin, bare figure
held tight for a second .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what is that to change a
person’s whole idea of himself?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he went on pressing his bare palm against the wet
corrugations of that inert trunk, it seemed to him imperative
to make an attempt then and there to evoke his
master-sensation. With a desperate straining of all the
energy of his spirit, he struggled to merge his identity in
that subaqueous landscape. He had, at that moment, a
strange feeling, as if he were seeking to embrace in the
very act of love the maternal earth herself! For, as he
strained his spirit to the uttermost, the landscape before
him ceased to be a mere assemblage of contours and
colours. It became one enormous water-plant, of vast,
cool, curving, wet-rooted leaves—leaves that unfolded
themselves, leaves that finally responded and yielded to
the outflung intensity of his magnetic gesture! “Not dead
yet!” he muttered aloud, as, with an exhausted sigh, he
turned to retrace his steps. “Not dead yet!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the reaction from this desperate plunge into his
mystic vice, Wolf found that he was beginning to feel
extremely hungry. “I don’t want to have to wait a minute
after I get there,” he thought. “I can’t cope with
Jason till I’ve had my tea. So it’s no use walking too
fast!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind began fumbling then, puzzled and weary,
around that question which always had such a curious
interest for him, as to the inner nature of each person’s
secret life-illusion—that peculiar consciousness people
build up as to their dominant “entelechy” or ultimate
life-flowering. Thus it seemed to him now, that while his
own life-illusion was his “mythology,” Christie’s must be
those “Platonic essences” about which she was always
pondering, Weevil’s the mystic beauty of girls’ legs, and
Urquhart’s the idea of his shameless book. He could
not help chuckling a little to himself when his exhausted
thoughts, like weary gnats that sink down upon water,
began hovering round the question as to what Jason’s
life-illusion was. “He has none! He has none!” he cried
aloud; and he found himself so excited by this explanation
of Jason’s peculiarities that, not thinking what he
did, he debouched into a field-path quite different from
the one that had led him into this lane.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After walking nearly a mile, this newly discovered
path conducted him, to his considerable surprise, into
Lenty Great Field—into the opposite side of the field to
that of Pond Lane. Indeed, so unfamiliar did the field
look from this direction, that it was only by the well-known
willow-trees in the centre that he recognized Lenty
Pond at all.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, there <span class='it'>is</span> Jason!” he said to himself; “and the
girl with him must be Mattie. Damn! How the devil shall
I cope with <span class='it'>this</span> combination?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then in a flash he realized that it was only his mental
preoccupation with Jason that had given these complete
strangers, sitting on the bank of Lenty Pond, <span class='it'>his</span> shape
and Mattie’s. Surely this man and this girl were completely
unknown to him! But <span class='it'>were</span> they? The man certainly
was. But the girl? Ah, he knew her! She was the
“automatic young lady” of Farmer’s Rest! So that wizened
old chap in a bowler-hat was her uncle .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the
unseen invalid he had heard calling out, “Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Jesus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Jesus!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As soon as he reached the side of the pond that was
nearest to him, the two figures, who were seated on the
opposite edge, stood up, the girl helping the man to his
feet. He could see they were exchanging remarks about
him; and knowing the condition of the man, he hesitated
and looked away, flicking the dead reed-stalks with
the end of his stick.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But as he hesitated there, he gave them a furtive sidelong
glance, and he saw they had begun to come slowly
along the side of the water, evidently intending to speak
to him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He advanced to meet them, and they met half-way
round the circle of the pond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How do you do, Mr. Solent,” said the girl quietly.
“This is my uncle, Mr. Solent.” Then she turned and
raised her voice, as if speaking to a deaf man. “This is
Mr. Solent, uncle; the gentleman I was telling you
about.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It gave Wolf a queer sensation to see this equivocal
“Miss Bess” again. Was it Gerda who had told him that
she was a friend of Bob Weevil’s? Little pleasure Mr.
Weevil would get out of her, judging by that evening of
the School-Treat!</p>

<p class='pindent'>But as she looked furtively into his eyes now, it was
difficult for him to believe that the quiver of chemical
attraction which for that single second united their nerves
had no normal eroticism in it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl was the first to drop her eyes. “Uncle
here takes all the time I’ve got, these days,” she murmured;
“uncle and the bar—don’t you, you funny old
man?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Round’s countenance flickered all over with little
wrinkles of complacent pride.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She looks arter me as if she were paid to do it,” he
remarked in a hollow voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m sure she does,” Wolf responded absent-mindedly,
his gaze wandering to the surface of Lenty Pond. “I
think you’re to be congratulated, Mr. Round, on having
so capable a niece,” he added after a pause, with a little
more emphasis.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Something about the landlord’s disordered physiognomy
began to suggest to his mind the head of a decapitated
criminal carried on a pole. It was just as he
was wondering how he was going to slip away from these
two, that there came into his head, as if from the lips of
a goblin inside him, that queer tag of bawdy gibberish
which Manley—or was it Josh Beard?—had chaunted
so derisively that night at the Three Peewits. “Jimmy
Redfern .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>he</span> was there!” mocked this jibing voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the man’s face had begun to expand with such
maudlin satisfaction that it became absurdly puckered
and puffed out, like a toy balloon composed of crocodile-skin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“One who looks after you so well, Mr. Round——”
continued Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At that moment, however, he caught the eye of the
automatic young lady fixed upon him so quizzically that
he felt the colour mounting to his cheeks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Curse the baggage!” he said to himself. “She’s not
one to be propitiated.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You chose a nice day to bring your uncle out,” he
remarked humbly, turning his back upon Lenty Pond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She brought me out. That’s what she done. And she
will take me in, present! We comes out and we goes in;
but ’tis they what bides.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re in the right of it <span class='it'>there</span>, Mr. Round,” said
Wolf, meeting the niece’s eye as boldly as he could.
“But I don’t think it was very wise of her to let you sit
down after all this rain.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I brought his shawl,” cried the girl, smiling. “Look,
uncle! You’ve left it over there.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The innkeeper turned his head. “Over there,” he
repeated; and pulling at his niece’s sleeve, he began
shuffling back. Wolf accompanied them round Lenty
Pond, and Miss Bess picked up the shawl. Bits of
rush-seed were adhering to it; and she shook it in the
air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-bye!” Wolf brought out at this point. “I’m
going to call at Pond Cottage before I walk back to
Blacksod.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tweren’t either o’ they,” the innkeeper murmured
hurriedly, “what drove him to it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf looked questioningly at the girl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s worried,” she said laconically. “Here, uncle,
lean on my arm and we’ll soon be home! Have you forgotten
what I’ve got for your tea?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The puckers and creases came wrinkling back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s got sardines for me tea,” he murmured confidentially.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Capital!” cried Wolf. “I hope they’ll have sardines at
Pond Cottage!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was on the point of leaving them, when the innkeeper
suddenly stretched out his free arm towards the
centre of the water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s where he do bide!” he murmured hoarsely.
“Churchyard can’t hold <span class='it'>he</span>!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The automatic young lady, to Wolf’s consternation,
proceeded to shake her relative by both shoulders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stop that, Uncle!” she cried angrily. “Stop that!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The corners of Mr. Round’s mouth fell. “Don’t ’ee
take no notice, maidie. I weren’t thinking what ’ee do
reckon I were.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He lowered his voice and leaned close to Wolf. “She
were afeard I were thinking of God,” he whispered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No I weren’t, Uncle!” cried Miss Elizabeth. “So don’t
tell stories to Mr. Solent.” She looked Wolf straight in
the face. “He’s worried,” she repeated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I see he is,” Wolf responded feebly. “Well, I hope
you’ll enjoy your sardines, Mr. Round.” And he added
in a firmer voice, “Good-bye! Good-bye!” and, lifting his
hat, moved away from them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he crossed the field he tried to think of each particular
spot of ground he had come to be so familiar
with in this locality .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Lenty Pond .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Melbury
Bub .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Poll’s Camp .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the Lunt meadows.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“These are the reality. These are what will last,” he
thought, “when all those agitated people with their crazy
fancies have passed into nothingness!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At the gate of Pond Cottage garden he glanced at his
watch. It was ten minutes past four. “I should have
sworn it was five,” he said to himself. “Time’s like a
telescope. It compresses itself or lengthens itself according
to our feelings.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The mystery of time continued to tease him as he
strode up the path.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His whole past seemed swallowed up by Mr. Urquhart’s
two hundred pounds and by “Mr. Malakite at
Weymouth.” “The misery of these decisions assumes
time,” he thought; “but what if time is itself an illusion?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>After he had rung the bell, he was struck by the
curious silence that always falls down on the thresholds
of houses, like the feathers of some vast overshadowing
bird, when house-bells are rung.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the door was brusquely flung open now; and there
were Darnley and Jason!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You?” cried the younger brother. “How splendid!
Our ladies have gone for a walk; but they’ll be back
presently. They’re sure to be back presently, because it’s
Dimity’s day out. Dimity’s gone to tea with Mrs. Martin,
up at the House. I’ve just been making Jason put on a
new tie.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned and looked affectionately at his brother,
while Wolf hung up his coat and hat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There!” Darnley cried. “You’ve been fooling with it
again. What a demon you are, Jason, after all my
trouble!” And lifting his hands to his brother’s throat
he set himself to rearrange the tie in question, which was
of a brilliant vermilion. Wolf was amazed at the amiable
gravity with which the poet submitted to this
gesture.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“These young wimming,” he mumbled—pronouncing
the word more quaintly than Wolf had ever heard Mr.
Torp pronounce it—“<span class='it'>like</span> red ties.” And moving to the
mirror above the hall-table, he proceeded to regard the
improved adornment with whimsical complacency.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They had not been seated many minutes beside the
drawing-room fire when Wolf took the bull by the horns.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Look here, Jason,” he began. “Why don’t you let me
send a selection of your poems up to London, so that
we can see what the critics think of them?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was an ominous silence. Darnley’s hand went up
to his beard; while his eyes fixed themselves frowningly
upon the coal-scuttle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Slowly Jason spoke, putting an abysmal malice into
his words.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You think you’re God, don’t you?” he remarked;
while out of a stony countenance his eyes flashed with
nervous fury.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt a tremor of anger; but he suppressed it
resolutely. “Those poems of yours ought to be published,”
he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“For you Londoners to scoff at!” returned the other.
“My poems may not be much,” Jason went on, “but I
don’t like their being poked about by you clever dogs,
any more than I’d like to have such rogues spit in my
porridge.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My mother has a cousin,” continued Wolf obstinately,
“who is very good at getting things taken he feels
interested in. He happens to be a lord, and had some
connection once with a publishing-house. I’d send your
poems to him first.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Will this lord you’re boasting about get a share of
the money?” asked Jason harshly. “Why don’t you introduce
Darnley to him? He might give Darnley a place
at that—Institution, where you used to teach Latin!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jason! Jason!” protested the young brother indignantly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the man went on. “If you’re not so much like God
as to be angry at everything that isn’t praise, I’ll give
you my advice. My advice is——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shut up, Jason, can’t you?” interrupted Darnley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My advice is that you go back to London. This Dorset
climate isn’t good for you! Those Londoners would
very soon give you plenty of money, when they heard
that your mother was cousin to that lord you were telling
us about just now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jason can’t forgive you, Solent,” interposed Darnley,
“for having heard his poems at all. Years ago he
read some to me, and afterwards stopped speaking to me
for three days!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Instead of being annoyed at this remarkable reminiscence,
the Slow-Worm of Lenty raised his shoulders and
chuckled audibly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You schoolmasters!” he cried. “Your holidays have
lasted too long! Teachers of Latin, like you, always get
fidgetty when you’re not with your boys.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t teach Latin,” murmured Wolf, in a voice almost
as silky as the Squire’s own. Anger was mounting
up within him like a black wave.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you want to know why I advise you to go back
to London?” went on Jason, disregarding this protest.
“Not because of Urquhart—though I’m tired of warning
you against <span class='it'>him</span>—but because if you go about with
<span class='it'>me</span> much longer, you’ll wake up one fine morning with
your merry little ways fallen from you like a snake’s
skin.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What ways?” asked Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, do shut up, Jason! Do stop making a bloody
ass of yourself!” interjected Darnley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Those feelings you have when you stretch out your
legs in the morning, and when you walk home to tea,
swinging your stick, and when you go up those back-stairs
of old Malakite’s, and when you drink that bottle
of gin of yours which I’ve heard about and forget that
it isn’t your first night with your young lady, and when
you enjoy those books in old Urquhart’s library and
tell yourself stories about them, and when he brings out
his second-best wine and you warm yourself at his fire,
and when you look over gates on your walks and think
that Nature is something!” He stopped breathlessly, and
then added, in the dead silence that followed, “If you go
about with me much longer you’ll find yourself falling
into <span class='it'>reality</span>, like .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. like an abortion into the Bog-stream!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jason, if you don’t shut up,” cried Darnley fiercely,
“I’ll go straight off to Preston Lane with Solent and leave
you alone!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all right,” interposed Wolf. “I don’t mind hearing
these things. But, if Darnley doesn’t object, I’d like
to ask you one question, Otter. What is it about me that
annoys you so?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The poet’s whole frame seemed to hug itself together,
to contract, to tighten. Then he said: “I’m not in the least
annoyed by anyone’s ways. We’re all beetles in the dung
of the earth. If you go about with me, Solent, you won’t
be able to think of yourself like you like to do, or about
any of your young ladies either! You’ll be glad enough
to get three good meals every day and to sleep as long
as you can.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You’ll learn from me more about the
value of sleep than about courting young ladies.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
So my advice is, get back to London, where that lord of
yours is, and teach——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was interrupted by the opening of the front-door
and the sound of Olwen’s shrill voice rising above those
of her companions. As they all hurried out into the hall
to greet the newcomers, Wolf thought to himself, “Now
we’ll see how three generations of feminine sensibility
will take possession of a house!” But things arranged
themselves very quietly. Mattie took Olwen upstairs, to
tidy her up, while Darnley followed his mother into the
kitchen, to help her getting tea. So that soon after their
arrival Wolf found himself alone with Jason by the
drawing-room fire.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They’ll be a long time,” said the poet, with grave
solemnity. “They always <span class='it'>are</span> a long time on Sundays.”
He then walked gingerly to the door and furtively closed
it. Returning to Wolf’s side by the hearth, he drew from
his pocket a crumpled piece of paper, which he carefully
unfolded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“When you send my poems to London,” he began
quietly, while Wolf, watching him with astonishment,
possessed himself of a seat from which he could see the
window, “I think it would be a good thing if you didn’t
leave out the last one I’ve written. It’s called ‘The Owl
and Silence.’ Do you mind if I read it to you now?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d like very much to hear it,” Wolf responded humbly;
but while the man was thus occupied, he allowed a
portion of his consciousness to appropriate to itself a
lovely bluish light that, with the falling of that winter
twilight, began to fill the uncurtained window.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Does it mean that the horizon is now clear of
clouds?” he thought to himself. And then he thought, “It
seems early for the twilight to be setting in.” The disarming
monotony of Jason’s voice blended with the impalpable
colour that filled the window-frame.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>When the mossy vistas call to the rain</p>
<p class='line0'>To ravish their fern-fronds green,</p>
<p class='line0'>Thro’ the dripping hazels they dart again,</p>
<p class='line0'>These points of damascene!</p>
<p class='line0'>And each root holds blood in its amber cup,</p>
<p class='line0'>Holds blood in its emerald bowl,</p>
<p class='line0'>While the White Owl covers silence up</p>
<p class='line0'>As death covers up the soul.</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
</div>
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>The great White Owl, he passes by</p>
<p class='line0'>Like a ghost among the guests.</p>
<p class='line0'>The wood-mice watch him with frightened eys;</p>
<p class='line0'>The birds crouch in their nests;</p>
<p class='line0'>And Silence asleep on her lichen bed,</p>
<p class='line0'>Asleep on her fungus sheet,</p>
<p class='line0'>Feels those feathers sink on her drooping head,</p>
<p class='line0'>And fall on her tender feet!</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
</div>
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>They have known each other so long, so long,</p>
<p class='line0'>That Owl and that Silence deep!</p>
<p class='line0'>The mosses and ferns to life belong;</p>
<p class='line0'>But they belong to sleep.</p>
<p class='line0'>They belong to the land behind all lands</p>
<p class='line0'>Where the greenest leaves look grey;</p>
<p class='line0'>Where the tree of the unknown sorrow stands</p>
<p class='line0'>Weeping its well-a-way!</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
</div>
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>For the Owl is old and Silence is old,</p>
<p class='line0'>And that tree is older yet!</p>
<p class='line0'>Its tears, malignant, drizzling, cold,</p>
<p class='line0'>Make their love-pillow wet!</p>
<p class='line0'>New moss, new ferns, the new spring brings;</p>
<p class='line0'>New primroses in death</p>
<p class='line0'>Are soothed by new moth-flutterings</p>
<p class='line0'>Of euthanasian breath;</p>
<p class='line'>&#160;</p>
</div>
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>But the Owl that over Silence sinks,</p>
<p class='line0'>With strange and drooping feathers,</p>
<p class='line0'>Eternal rest-without-end drinks,</p>
<p class='line0'>Absolved from all life’s weathers.</p>
<p class='line0'>Each root holds blood in its amber cup,</p>
<p class='line0'>Holds blood in its emerald bowl,</p>
<p class='line0'>But the White Owl covers Silence up</p>
<p class='line0'>As death covers up the soul.</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I like that <span class='it'>very</span> much!” he murmured gently,
when the man’s voice died away. “Certainly we will include
<span class='it'>that</span> in what we send to London!” It somehow
seemed quite natural to him now, in the fleeting loveliness
of this blue light, that Jason should, without retracting
his spleen, have accepted his offer. As he
watched the man crouching there between himself and
that unearthly atmosphere, his sombre figure became for
him a monumental symbol charged with feelings beyond
expression. At how many hearths, that winter afternoon,
were human beings watching this strange blueness, flung
against their casements like the dreamy breath of the
earth itself, caught ere it dissolved into space! That
aerial transparency might easily be something that never
again in all the days of his life would appear exactly as
it did now! Oh, how he longed to scoop it up in great
handfuls and pour it forth over every wounded spirit in
the world! How he longed to sprinkle it like holy water
over that face upon the Waterloo steps! A strange melting
happiness began to thrill through him—and then,
suddenly, “Mr. Malakite at Weymouth.” <span class='it'>No!</span> He would
have supper with Christie; but he would keep his integrity.
At eleven o’clock he would go back to Gerda.
The idea of this <span class='it'>eleven o’clock</span> seemed like a penitential
offering, heavy to lift, which, by a superhuman
effort, he would offer up to his Deus Absconditus. But
even now, as he heard Olwen’s light steps and bursts of
laughter in the room above, the thought of the two-hundred
dragged his resolution down. He <span class='it'>couldn’t</span> give up
the relief of flinging this cheque into his mother’s lap;
and by some intricate psychic law it seemed useless
to renounce Christie’s bed and yet accept Urquhart’s
money!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason’s voice interrupted his meditations. But it was
not of poetry he spoke. “Tell me, Solent,” he said,
“would you prophesy from what you know of me that I
would outlive you by ten years?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not ten, Jason!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Five, then?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Four?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“By three years, then?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, perhaps you <span class='it'>may</span> outlive me by three! But
listen, Jason. I wish you’d let me run up for a minute
to your room, before they all come in. May I do that?”
And he began to move to the door. Jason rose quickly
to his feet and followed him. His expression was grave
and extremely perturbed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d go to Darnley’s room if I were you,” he said
eagerly. “The basin’s much grander there than in mine.
But, of course, if you’re nervous of doing anything in
there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and would feel happier in mine .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but
mine wouldn’t suit you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It’s not in your
style.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know very well what style it’s in,” retorted Wolf,
as he opened the door; “but don’t be worried. I’ll use
Darnley’s.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was indeed with a curious relief that he found himself
in his friend’s room. How refreshingly bare it was!
The dressing-gown hanging on a nail upon the door, the
three pairs of boots placed in a neat row at the bed’s
head, the grey schoolmaster’s-suit carefully folded upon
a chair—all these objects, combined with the faint sea-sand
smell that came from the enormous sponge upon
the washing-stand, brought to Wolf as he stood among
them, washing his hands with Windsor soap, a wholesome
and liberating peace.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He, a man, was in a man’s fortress, a man’s retreat!
How cool and quiet did that strip of uncarpeted floor
look, with the beautiful blue light lying upon it! How
reassuring was the great flat tin bath propped up against
the wall!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He couldn’t help thinking, as he poured the soap-suds
out of the white basin into the white chamber-pot—for
evidently Darnley was allowed no slop-pail—how all his
agitations had to do with women. “I’m attracted to
them,” he thought, as he instinctively pressed his friend’s
great sea-smelling sponge against his face, “but there
must be something in my nature that causes them to
weary of me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that irritates them, that infuriates them
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. unless I behave with diabolical cunning over a long
stretch of time .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and that is difficult .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that is almost
impossible!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Half-an-hour later, seated between Olwen and Mrs. Otter,
with Darnley and Mattie opposite him, and Jason
at the foot of the table, Wolf found that the airy chatter
that had been going on, ever since they began their
tea, about this and that aspect of the countryside, ended
by troubling him with a bitter nostalgia. His brief holiday
was already near its close; and how many days
and months and years of his life was he destined to
spend in that accursed schoolroom! Stirred into magnetic
activity by the candlelight and the strong cups of tea,
his deepest will set itself to overcome this menace. “I
am god of my own mind,” he said to himself; “and
when I’m not actually teaching history—or ‘Latin,’ as
Jason would say—I can re-create, out of thin air, the
essences of earth, grass, rain, wind, valleys, and hills!
I’ve only to concentrate my mind on the living eidolons
in my mind; and even if they put me into prison—and
Blacksod School <span class='it'>is</span> a prison—I ought still to be able to
cry at the end like my father, ‘Christ, I’ve had a happy
life!’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And as he continued to bandy jests with first one and
then another, in his heart he thought, “Lenty Pond, the
Gwent Lanes, the Lunt Meadows .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. there they remain,
all night .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. all the long windy nights .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. there they
remain; and I can see them, touch them, smell them, yes!
and become them, whatever burdens Fate puts upon me!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was at this point that he found himself arrested by
something Mattie had begun to say. She was speaking of
some recent argument she had had with Darnley; and
as she murmured the words, “Darnley and I,” Wolf was
suddenly struck by the nature of the look she turned upon
his friend. It was a glowing, possessive look, full of just
that maternal sensuality which he himself hated to receive
more than any other look he could think of! But
Darnley seemed to derive satisfaction rather than annoyance
from this look of hers; for his eyes darkened to a
colour like luminous indigo, as he responded to it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ha!” thought Wolf. “So <span class='it'>that’s</span> how it has worked out!
His love for her spirit has been accepted on its own
terms; and his inhibition with regard to her body has
become a matter of maternal solicitude to her. Ay, what
convoluted beings we all are!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go on, my dear,” he said cheerfully. “Let’s have it!
Let’s hear everything about it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie met his eyes with an equivocal response. He
knew she was aware of something hostile to her in his
mood. There was a flickering half-second of actual contention
between them as their grey eyes encountered.
Then she said, turning to Mrs. Otter: “It was a long
discussion we had .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it would be silly to tell it all.
I happened to say something about plants having souls
inside them .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. no! trees it was .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and Darnley said
that the souls of trees and flowers and everything else
weren’t ‘inside’ at all, but on the surface .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’m putting
it right, aren’t I, Darnley?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t——” protested the schoolmaster gravely. “I
don’t quite know what you mean by ‘souls’; but if you
mean what’s most essential to them .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. colour .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
scent .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. expression .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. appearance .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. yes, it’s certainly
on the outside!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t understand, Darnley,” threw in Mrs. Otter,
with a face full of nervous concern, “how you can talk
like that! We’ve been taught .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. haven’t we .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.?”
She broke off and looked appealingly at her eldest son.
“What do you think about it, Jason?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Olwen, who had been keeping up a surreptitious
dialogue with Jason during the whole of tea-time, raised
her voice at this.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>He</span> knows about it, because he’s a tree himself .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
aren’t you, Jason? And <span class='it'>I</span> know about it, because I’m a
bird in a tree!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason, who with flushed face had been encouraging
her in her mischief—and Wolf fancied that both Mattie
and Darnley had been the butts of their roguery—now
became gravely sardonic.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We ought to have Tilly-Valley here,” he said, “to tell
us what he’s learnt from the Bishop of Salisbury about
the soul!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I agree entirely with Darnley!” Wolf burst out with a
violence that astonished himself. His annoyance at Mattie’s
maternal sensuality must have suddenly mingled
with a sharp suspicion that Jason and Olwen had been
making sport of him too!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“With Darnley?” murmured Mrs. Otter, still anxiously
looking at her elder son to see if he had anything further
to say.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wolf’s not a bird <span class='it'>or</span> a tree, is he, Jason?” whispered
Olwen, with teasing eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s absurd,” cried Wolf excitedly, while his upper-lip
began to protrude and tremble so much that an observer
might have been reminded of Miss Gault. “It’s
absurd to talk of souls being inside things! They’re <span class='it'>always</span>
on the outside! They’re the glamour of things .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
the magic .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the bloom .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the breath. They’re the
<span class='it'>intention</span> of things!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His irritation at this moment was not lessened by a
furtive taunt of the demon within himself repeating Mr.
Urquhart’s biting phrase, “So you <span class='it'>have</span> a soul, then,
Menelaus?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But, Wolf,” protested Mattie, in an obstinate and
sulky tone, “you’re contradicting yourself! How can anything
be intended and expressed if it isn’t there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
inside .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. already?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf bit his lip to restrain himself from an outburst
of anger.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all so confusing to most of us, Mattie dear,” murmured
Mrs. Otter. “We can only hope and pray that the
Judge of all the earth will do right.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The incongruous piety of this expression seemed to act
like the old “<span class='it'>Ite missa est</span>” to the company about that
candle-lighted table. As Wolf rose to go, there swept
over him a shuddering vision of what such encounters
as this might prove to him in the future, when he had
lost all his self-respect. As he said good-bye to Mrs. Otter
over the child’s head, and felt that hot little forehead
pressed against the pit of his stomach, and those long,
thin arms clasped passionately round his waist, he realized
that to assassinate his self-respect in the manner he
intended would be to break the luminous interior life-pool
that nourished all his happiness with its fleeting reflections!
To feel toward himself in a certain way .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
to recognize himself as a person incapable of doing this
or that .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. such apparently was the “glassy essence”
of that ecstasy that was his grand secret.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When at last the garden-gate had closed behind him
and he had entered the darkness of Pond Lane, he found
that in his mental exhaustion all manner of queer little
objects, casually noted during his months in Dorset,
were floating in upon him. The bell-handle of Mrs. Herbert’s
door, the white scar on the hand of that old waiter
at the Lovelace, the stunted laburnum-branch in his back-yard—his
mind had to make a definite effort to throw
off these things.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve got a sort of under-life,” he thought, “full of
morbid hieroglyphics. Something must have died down
there, and the blow-flies are laying their eggs in it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gathering up all the spiritual strength he possessed,
he flung his mind outwards, far over those silent reaches
of meadow-grass and fallow land. He imagined as vividly
as he could all that was going on in that darkened margin
of Blackmore. He followed the skulking of foxes
under the hazels, the stirrings of hedgehogs in their
hibernating-quiescence, the crouching of birds on leafless
boughs, the burrowing of moles under their hillocks,
the breathing of cattle in their barns.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He imagined all these things so intensely, one by one,
that he began to feel that he shared those nocturnal
movements—that he was no stranger among them, but
himself a furtive, lonely earth-life among other earth-lives,
drawing, as they did, some curative magnetism
from the dark greenish-black hide of the great planetary
body! And he thought how stoically all these living
things—the patient trees most of all—endured those
diseased portions of their identities, those morbid under-lives,
where the blow-flies of dissolution were at work.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can do it!” he thought. “It isn’t for ever.” And in
his necessity he laid hold of those two dark horns of
non-existence, from the cold slippery touch of which
all flesh shrinks back—the horn of the ages before he
was born, the horn of the ages when he would have
ceased to be. “I can plough on,” he said to himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The clock in the mid-Victorian tower of the town-hall
was just beginning to strike a quarter to seven when
Wolf reached the Blacksod High Street. The words of
an unknown farm-labourer he had met on the road repeated
themselves in his brain as he turned up his collar
against a merciless downpour. “Blowing up for rain,
Mister!” and Wolf’s mind turned these harmless words
into a vast non-human menace, directed against him by
some malignancy in the very system of things.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stopped for a minute at the entrance to Preston
Lane, to decide whether to go straight to Mrs. Herbert’s
and give his mother the cheque, or to let it wait till the
following morning.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I were a bit more superstitious,” he thought, “I’d
curse Mukalog for this!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stood disconsolately watching the splashing of the
water-drops in the puddles by the roadside. “They don’t
<span class='it'>dance</span>!” he said to himself. “Reality’s always different
from the way people put it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>With an obscure instinct to postpone giving the cheque
to his mother, he stared intently at those splashing drops,
to see what they really <span class='it'>did</span> do under the flickering lamplight!</p>

<p class='pindent'>No, they didn’t “dance.” Each individual drop, as it
fell, seemed to draw up the water of that dark puddle
in a tiny pyramid; but there were so many of them that
it was hard to focus the attention upon any single one
of those minute waterspouts. When, however, he lifted
his head, the volume of rain driving eastward along
pavement and gutter took a continuity of form, like the
identity of some desperate living thing, bent on pursuit
or escape.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Against this cold, blind presence he now resolutely
pushed on. “If there’s a light in mother’s room,” he said
to himself, “I’ll go straight in and give it to her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>True to the usual caprice of Chance, when it’s invoked
as an oracle, there <span class='it'>was</span> a light, and yet there was
<span class='it'>not</span> a light. It was clear to him, as he approached Mrs.
Herbert’s door, that there was a glow in his mother’s
room that came from the fire and not from any lamp
or candle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll have done something for <span class='it'>you</span>, old Truepenny,”
he muttered, “if you care anything what becomes of her!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He opened the little iron gate and moved stealthily to
the door of the house. Before ringing, he peered as
closely as he could into the fire-lit room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“God!” he gasped, in a spasm of irrational fury, “if
that brute isn’t with her now.” There was, indeed, no
doubt about it. Mr. Manley was snugly ensconced by
Mrs. Solent’s fireside, though all Wolf could detect of
their two figures was the shoulders of the man, upright
in a high-backed chair, and a fragment of his mother’s
profile as she bent over the fire.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, the brute! Oh, the brute!” he groaned, as he
sneaked back, returning as stealthily as he had come.
“If they’d had the lamp lit——” he added weakly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He crossed the road; and lurching forward against
the torrential rain, he stopped when he reached the
pigsty. A fantastic dread lest he should find the same
fire-lit glow in Gerda’s parlour—with Bob Weevil installed
there, like a maggot in an apple—made him reluctant
so much as to glance at his own house. Was
Christie, too, sitting by <span class='it'>her</span> fire, acting the devoted
daughter to Mr. Malakite?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Three fires and three women—and Mr. Wolf Solent
leaning against the pigsty!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The rain now began to find his skin. A little trickle
of ice-cold drops descended between his coat-collar and
his neck.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he clung with his hands to the wet railing, he could
hear one of the animals rustling in the straw in the interior
shed. Was it ill? Was it moving in its sleep? Or was
it simply guzzling in there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in warm, dry darkness?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He pushed the outer gate open, hardly knowing what
he did. So here he was, standing shivering inside that
so-often-observed enclosure, from which the familiar
stench emerged that had been the accompaniment of all
these eventful months!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Weevil’s with her,” he thought. “I know it as well
as if I’d seen his Panurge nose! He’s with her. She’s
going to give him supper .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or perhaps they’re roasting
chestnuts! She said once they used to roast chestnuts
together.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He fumbled about with his fingers for the latch of the
inner door. How soaked with rain the woodwork was! A
second pig began to stir now and emitted a feeble grunt.
Then he gave up trying to find the latch; and pressing
his two hands against the jambs of the door, he bowed
down his head until his forehead rested upon the low
wooden lintel. At this moment it was given to him to taste
those secret dregs of misery, cold as ice and black as
pitch, that lie dormant under the lips of every descendant
of Adam.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Here he remained perfectly still, while it seemed to
him that the wind was whistling a special little tune, composed
for his benefit, through the dripping boards of the
pigsty.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wishaloog! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. wishaloog!” whistled the wind.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Then all of a sudden he burst out laughing. “A
comic King Lear! That’s what I am! There’s nothing
tragic about this, Wolf, my friend! What you’ve got to
do is to defy omens and fight for your own hand.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rose up erect, tightened his fingers round his stick,
and straightened his shoulders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve got Urquhart’s cheque,” he thought, “and by this
time tomorrow—‘Mr. Malakite at Weymouth.’ ” Once
more, while he used these words, what he saw in his
mind was the little blue veins under Christie’s satiny
skin—just above her knees.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was then—and he had remarked it in himself before—that
the constriction of lust endowed his spirit
with a recklessness that was alien to his character.
“Wishaloog! Wishaloog!” whistled the wind; but mounting
up, out of the chill of the nether pit, something in his
nature, some savage stirring of his animal will, mocked
back now at this impish derision.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Whi .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Hoo! <span class='it'>thee own self!</span>” he cried aloud, mimicking
the tone in which Gerda’s father used this West
Country retort. Without further delay he left the pigsty,
crossed the road, and rushed into his house.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not a sign of Bob Weevil. But oh, what a relief it was,
a relief beyond anything he had expected, when he entered
his own kitchen and found Gerda, arrayed in a
spotless print apron, laying the supper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He could see how pleased the girl was at the obvious
genuineness of the emotion with which he greeted her.
And genuine indeed his feelings were; though not all of
them would have caused her equal satisfaction had they
been exposed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He ran upstairs to change his clothes, bringing the
drenched ones down with him a minute or two later to
dry them by the stove. The warmth of the kitchen, the
steam that came from his wet things, the rank earthy
smell of boiling turnips, the affectionate scolding of this
beautiful young being, betrayed him quickly enough into
that peculiar intimacy where the safety of virtue becomes
the voluptuousness of content. The beat of the rain
on the roof enhanced this security; while everything outside
his four walls seemed a sweet shiver of excluded
danger.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve agreed to finish Urquhart’s book,” he said, “and
he’s paid me in advance. But the chances are that I’ll
have to lend this money to Mother. Anyhow, I’m not going
to think about it tonight. I’ll wrap it round Jason’s
idol for the present .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. then <span class='it'>you</span> won’t want to meddle
with it any more than I do!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Saying this, he opened the dresser-drawer with a jerk
and thrust Mr. Urquhart’s cheque under the stomach of
the prostrate god of rain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Though he did all this with an air of careless decision,
it was with several anxious side-glances that he
scanned Gerda’s face as he washed his hands in the
little tin basin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This process of washing his hands before a meal was
one that he always prolonged with elaborate punctiliousness;
and now, as he played with the iridescent bubbles
and squeezed the yellow soap into a foaming lather, he
could not help making a grimace into the little square
mirror that Gerda had hung above the sink, as the
thought crossed his mind that although he had sold half
his soul that morning and was intending to sell the other
half of it tomorrow night, he could still enjoy with childish
satisfaction the pleasure of sitting down to supper,
in his own kitchen, opposite his own girl!</p>

<p class='pindent'>As far as he could read her thoughts Gerda had decided
to remain entirely non-committal over the matter
of the two hundred, postponing, he suspected, any struggle
about it until she realized more clearly which way
the wind was going to blow. She gave him a lively description,
as they sat down to their meal, of a visit she
had had that morning from her mother and Lobbie. It
transpired that Lob was to start his first term at the
Grammar School when the holidays ended, and that
Mrs. Torp, in complete ignorance of the ways of such
places, was assuming that her son-in-law would be her
son’s constant and indulgent preceptor!</p>

<p class='pindent'>When their supper was finished Gerda leaned over
and reached for an open book that lay on the edge of
the dresser. Lighting a cigarette as frowningly and awkwardly
as if it had been the first she had ever smoked,
she pulled the lamp towards her. “I’ve got to an exciting
part,” she said. And then, a second later, “I think
‘Theodoric the Icelander’ is the nicest book I’ve ever
read!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her fair head, for she was a little short-sighted, sank
down over the open volume; and Wolf, still seated opposite
her on his kitchen-chair, was left to stare at the
polished handles of the drawer that contained both Mukalog
and the cheque.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His pleasant relapse into the comfort of virtue ebbed
and vanished with the girl’s absorption in her story.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Tomorrow .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. tomorrow .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what <span class='it'>would</span> the upshot
be? He sat bolt upright in his chair, holding a
match-box in one hand and an unlit cigarette in the
other. It was as if he were secretly praying for some unexpected
external event, like a sudden uncharted reef,
to break up the dark-swelling wave upon which he was
being carried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Soon he let both match-box and cigarette slip from
his fingers, and, lifting his elbows upon the table,
pressed his knuckles against his closed eyeballs. How
they throbbed .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. those eyeballs .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and what surprising
shapes and colours those were, that appeared before
his inner vision!</p>

<p class='pindent'>With a sort of sullen curiosity he watched those floating
geometric shapes—green and purple and yellow and
violet. “Each of these,” he thought, “might be a world.
Perhaps it <span class='it'>is</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and from the point of view of the
Absolute just as important a world as this of ours!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then something completely different from geometric
shapes appeared. Well enough he knew what <span class='it'>this</span>
was .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. even before its lineaments had grown distinct.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The unhappy one of the Waterloo steps!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Very well, then,” he muttered under his breath, taking
his hands from his face. “Very well, then, I shall
see thee at Philippi!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And as he folded his hands behind his head, looking
across at Gerda and her Icelander, he set himself to
curse the misery the human mind can go through because
of this wretched necessity for action, for decision, for
using what is called “the will.” What did a person feel
when the hard little crystal of his inmost life lost its integrity?
What did food taste like, what did the warmth
of fire mean to such a derelict? A Wolf who had gone
back to <span class='it'>that book</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a Wolf who had seduced Christie
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. how could such a Wolf ever swing his stick,
ever drink up “the sweet of the morning,” ever feel the
wind upon his face, with the old thrill?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Among the fragments of their meal his eye now fell
upon a chicken-bone upon Gerda’s plate, the last surviving
relic of their meagre Christmas dinner. It was a
“wishing-bone,” from which Gerda, as they had pulled it
between them, had won the right of “wishing”; and it
lay there now, with the library-cover of “Theodoric the
Icelander” just touching its forked and bare forlornness.
But the sight of it sent Wolf’s mind upon a long,
fantastic quest. He seemed compelled, by some hypnosis
proceeding from the wishing-bone, to make a Domesday
Survey of all the trivial and repulsive objects he had
ever passed by. Wolf and the wishing-bone set out together,
in fact, upon a pilgrimage through the limbo
of the world’s rubbish-heaps.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Some of the objects were commonplace enough; others
were fantastic. The scavenging-obsession of the wishing-bone
allowed him to omit nothing that he could rake up
out of a thousand obscure half-memories. The thumbnail-parings
of a nameless old tramp sitting by a milestone
on the Bristol road .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the amber-coloured drop of
rheum in the eye of a one-eyed door-keeper of a house
of ill-fame in Soho .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the torn-off corner of a butcher’s
advertisement lying in a gutter outside St. Paul’s
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the left arm of a china doll thrown on an ash-can
under the west door of Ely Cathedral .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the yellow
excrement of a dog, shaped like a dolphin, adhering to
the north wall of the Brighton Aquarium .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the white
spittle of a drunken cabman outside the station at Charing
Cross .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the hair-clippings from an unknown
head, wrapped in a French comic paper and dropped in
the public urinal at Eastbourne .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. such things, and
others like them, all parts and parcels of what humanity
<span class='it'>sets itself to forget</span>, did Wolf and the wishing-bone redeem
from the limbo of obliterated memory and gather
in a heap on the kitchen-table of Number Thirty-Seven
Preston Lane!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Was it a sign that his “mythology” was already dying,
that his mind became so easily servile to these rakings
among the offscourings of the earth?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He struggled to shake off this curious morbidity; and
in order to give Gerda a further chance of enjoying
“Theodoric” in peace, he rose from the table now, and
carrying their plates and dishes to the sink in the corner,
he set himself to wash them up with a slow and concentrated
nicety. This mechanical task, at which he was inordinately
clumsy, acted as an opiate to his mind. He
felt, as he proceeded to dry those various objects, as if,
with the wet cloth he held, he were obliterating much
more than ever the wishing-bone had called up!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Finally, before Gerda and he put out their lamp, he
deliberately endeavoured to prolong this pleasant numbness
by drinking several stiff glasses of gin. This gin had
been their Christmas present from Mr. Torp; and most
friendly did Wolf feel to his father-in-law, when under
its beneficent influence he slipped into bed beside the
already unconscious girl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s the best of all drinks,” he thought. “By God,
I’ll be economical with it! It’s a good thing Bob Weevil
doesn’t like it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind seemed preternaturally clear now, as he lay
on his back listening to Gerda’s soft breathing and to
the intermittent wind-gusts that kept tossing into that
darkened room a brackish odour from the far-off Sedgemoor
marshes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s the stream of life itself that is important,” he
thought, “not any particular event or emotion! Just to be
thrillingly happy over a crowd of little half-remembered,
half-forgotten sensations .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that’s the whole thing.
And it has got in it something much more than that .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
something more spiritual than anyone knows. It has effects
beyond the visible world. It needs an effort of will as
great as what saints and artists use! Oh, if only I could
find words for this .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but I never shall, I never shall.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stretched himself stiff and tense as he lay there,
while like an aerial landscape, luminous and yet minutely
distinct, his vision of things gathered, clarified,
mounted up, as if out of a transparent sea.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The stream of life is made of little things,” he said
to himself. “To forget the disgusting ones and fill yourself
with the lovely ones .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that’s the secret. What a
fool I was to try and make my soul into a round, hard
crystal! It’s a lake .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>that’s</span> what it is .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. with a
stream of shadows drifting over it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. like so many
leaves!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Instinctively he avoided any definite thought of Urquhart’s
cheque and of the morrow’s supper. But they
were both there. They were like a dull throbbing at the
back of his closed eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What people call ‘futility,’ ” so his thoughts ran on,
“is just the failure of great emotions. But it’s a good
thing for them to fail. Let them fail! Only when they
fail does the under-tide of life itself rise to the surface.
Futility is the transparency of the lake .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what makes
the shadows fall and float .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. beautiful .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. like
leaves!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Before he knew that sleep was anywhere near him, he
sank, just as he was, like a drifting log in his own leaf-strewn
lake, into the region where the living are as the
dead. But the suppressed intention at the back of his
brain awoke him into full consciousness again, just before
dawn.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was by this time an indescribable chilliness in
the room, different from the chilliness of the rain and
the wind as they had been when he had gone to sleep.
Lying with hunched shoulders and hooked knees close to
Gerda’s side, his arm flung across the girl’s body, he
felt through every nerve this new feeling in the air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His human soul seemed to leave its body and pass out
of that small room into the great air-spaces that suspended
themselves above the West Country. The interior
chilliness of the darkness as the delaying dawn drew him
forth, had that within it which corresponded to the spring
of the year; only, <span class='it'>this</span> was the spring of one winter’s
night! There was a greenish, wet-growing stir in that
dawn’s approach; and the whole night about him seemed
to shudder and contract like the cramped shuddering of
an unborn child.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not a muscle did he move as he lay there, hunched and
inert, his stiff fingers folded around Gerda’s right breast
like the fingers of an infant around the toy with which
it has been soothed to sleep. But within his curved skeleton
his mind was lucid with the lucidity of something
starkly at bay.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Malakite at Weymouth” and that piece of paper
wrapped about Mukalog had become part of his very
brain .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. part of the machinery of his brain .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but
his mind was grappling now with something more than
machinery. More? Yes! There was more .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. somewhere
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. more .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. than just this dawn-chilled
Space, through which, like a wingless, tail-less, beakless
bird’s head, with oceans for eyes, the earth he lived
upon lurched, darted, oscillated, shivered, spun!</p>

<div><h1 id='chap20'>MR. MALAKITE AT WEYMOUTH</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s inmost soul seemed torn up, like a piece
of turf under a sharp ploughshare, as, driven by a power
beyond his resistance, he put one foot in front of the
other in his obstinate march to the Malakite house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he moved on past the shop-windows oblivious of
everything but the drama within him, he tried to anticipate
the result of what he was projecting. His “mythology”
had always implied for him some sort of mystic
participation in a deep occult struggle going on in
the hidden reservoirs of Nature. Stripped of it, there
would be nothing left but a stoical endurance—endurance
of his own misery and a few attempts to soften
the misery of others! He would be left with a soul that
had the power of moving his arms and legs, the power
of throwing itself into other people’s tortured nerves—and
that would be all! He would be able to deny himself
this and that for the sake of these people, paying
back what he owed, sharing the burden of the cruelty
of the ultimate Power—but that would be all! The old
Wolf, the old, obsessed medium for lovely, magical,
invisible influences, would be gone for ever!</p>

<p class='pindent'>And even now, if he could only stiffen his will to leave
Christie early that night, he might save what he was
losing. Oh, what cruelty the Power behind life possessed,
to transfix him upon such a dilemma! Oh, what
cruelty it possessed! Well, he would defy it. That was
the word. He would defy it. Whether he chose his “mythology”
or whether he chose his satisfaction, this ultimate
thing was something so inhuman, that defiance
was the only retort! If he chose his “mythology” it
would not be in submission to <span class='it'>this cause of all suffering</span>.
It would be a league with invisible forces that resembled
himself—compassionate forces, that were also
defying this inhuman thing. Dante had said, <span class='it'>“E la sua
voluntade è nostra pace</span>.” He would reverse this saying.
The will of the power behind life was clearly that human
nerves should be confronted by monstrous, hideous
dilemmas. To the end of his days he would protest!
He would be the champion of human nerves against this
ultimate tormentor. If he kept his self-respect and left
Christie in peace, he would use his “mythology” to defy
this power. If he seduced Christie and lost his life-illusion,
he would still defy this power.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mechanical advance had brought him now to
the turn into the narrower street. In three minutes he
would be in Christie’s room! He took off his hat and
looked up at the drifting rain-clouds. The gusty rain
made it impossible for him to keep his eyes open; but
with his eyelids tight shut he cursed the power behind
life. “You Mukalog up there!” he muttered. “You scurvy
Mukalog up there!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was not ten minutes past nine by the small clock
upon Christie’s mantelpiece when she and Wolf returned
to her sitting-room and closed the door, after washing
up the supper-things in the little alcove between that
room and the girl’s bedroom.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf sank down in the chair by the fire which faced
the window, and leisurely lit a cigarette; while Christie,
seated upon a four-legged stool opposite him, a stool
embroidered with pale early-Victorian pansies by the
hands of her mother, leaned forward towards the bars,
and with a thin outstretched bare arm prodded the coals
into flame.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This done, she impetuously rose to her feet; and
taking a “spill” from one of the blue vases that stood
on each side of the clock, she also lit a cigarette. And
then, resettling herself upon the stool, one lean arm encircling
her knees and the other holding the cigarette,
she turned her head round and surveyed the tumbled litter
of books, some open and some shut, that covered the
lavender-coloured sofa.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No; I’ve tired of ‘Tristram Shandy,’ ” she said. “In
fact, I’ve got at present a reaction against all those old
books which are so entirely <span class='it'>men’s books</span>—full of masculine
prejudices, masculine vices, masculine complacency!
You know, Wolf, I think it’s such a pity that the
best old books should all be written by men. What I’d
like to read would be an Elizabethan Jane Austen, a
Jacobean Emily Brontë, an eighteenth-century George
Eliot. It’s so annoying to me that the best women writers
all belong to the time when the custom had stopped of
calling a spade a spade.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was something so quaint to his mind in Christie’s
fragile identity being stirred by the urge of drastic
realism, that he looked at her in amazement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They’re not so reticent now, are they?” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But it was difficult for him to give his full attention
to this dialogue between them. Another dialogue, far
more important, was going on in his own mind. With
concentrated interest he had already noticed that she
was wearing brown silk stockings under her thin brown
skirt. The sight of her bare arms made him shiver at the
thought of her slipping off those stockings! It seemed
absurd that he dared not even kneel down and unbutton
the straps of her little-girl black slippers! The thought,
“She’s never had a lover .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. no one has ever undressed
her .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. she doesn’t know what it is to be idolized from
head to foot,” ran like ravishing little drops of quicksilver
through his tingling nerves. “Under that brown
dress, under all she’s got on, she’s as slim and slippery
as a bluebell-stalk pulled up by the root!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wouldn’t call them reticent today,” he repeated
aloud. But his mind raced back over the whole course of
his life in Dorset as he looked at her now .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so virginal
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and so free from conscience!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Far more—oh, far more than Gerda, who seemed like
a recognized, an <span class='it'>accepted</span> portion of his destiny—did this
evasive little being seem to embody all his hovering, intangible
dreams! It was hard to shake off a quivering
cloud, beyond the cloud of cigarette-smoke, that dimmed
his vision, as he looked at her. How he longed to snatch
away that brown dress, wintry-withered as it was, that
hid her from him!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Not reticent, perhaps,” she was saying. “But it’s utterly
different in these days, Wolf. They don’t do it for
simple, mischievous pleasure. They do it for principle’s
sake, for the sake of science, for the sake of a new
fashion in art. It’s all premeditated and deliberate.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He began to feel such an overpowering desire to seize
upon her now, that the idea of losing his life-illusion
seemed like tearing a mask from his face, a mask that
hurt his flesh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How does your own writing go, Chris?” he asked in
a forced, queer voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She reached over to the sofa and piled “Tristram
Shandy” on the top of “Humphrey Clinker,” and the
“Anatomy of Melancholy” on the top of “Tristram
Shandy.” As she did this she smiled sideways at him,
while the smoke from her cigarette rose up as if from a
hidden crucible of incense pressed against her knees. He
had noticed before, that she never said anything important
to him except while making some physical movement
to distract attention from her words!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Reaching over still further, in order to balance the
“Urn-Burial” on the top of the “Anatomy,” “I’ve finished,”
she murmured, “my seventh chapter.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is it a real story, then?” he asked, wondering if she
would yield to him without a struggle if he took her
quickly by the wrists.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her defensive gesture this time, as she responded to
his question, was to flick off a small grey ash upon the
cover of “Hydriotaphia.” He had long ago observed with
an amused interest what a dislike to the use of ash-trays
she had.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope it’s real!” she murmured, in her most straw-like
voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The best thing would be,” he thought to himself,
“just to take hold of her by her hands and lift her up!”
Aloud he said. “What’s its title, if you don’t mind my
asking that?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Guess, Wolf!” she said, without a smile. Indeed, she
had never looked graver or more concerned than she
looked then. “I thought of it when I was out marketing
in High Street the other day.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The Grey Feather?” he flung out, as he rose with a
bound from his chair and groped on the floor. He had
caught sight of the feather lying there at his feet. It
must have fluttered out when she moved the book. As
he picked it up, his contact with Christie’s floor made
him think of Gerda’s floor .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. which had so different
a carpet!</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a moment, as he replaced the feather, when
a featherweight decided it. What he fancied made him
pause was a sudden memory of the confiding repose of
Gerda’s expression as she bent so closely over “Theodoric
the Icelander”; but when he recalled all this later,
the conclusion he came to was that the touch of the
feather itself had restrained him!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ‘The Grey Feather’ .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. is your title,” he repeated,
while Christie managed with fair success to conceal her
face in a dense cloud of smoke.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No,” she said, “I’ve called it ‘Slate.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The astonishment with which he received this piece of
news was quite genuine.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Because of the view from your window?” he enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No. Because of——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the creaking of his wicker-chair, as he resumed
his seat with a helpless groan, drowned her faint words.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I didn’t hear, Chris,” he said. But he knew by the way
she raised her chin that nothing would induce her to
repeat what she had just uttered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What I’m trying to do, Wolf,” she went on, in a tone
that seemed to him to have in it something like a challenge,
“is to express a point of view entirely feminine!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It will be the view of a feminine Elemental, then,”
he said to himself. “Does she think that she’s like the
rest of them? God! It’ll be the view of a sylph in the
Lunt mists, or of Jason’s Nymph in Lenty Pond!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All the clever ones nowadays just copy men,” she
remarked, with the same nuance of defiance, holding her
chin high and sitting very straight upon her stool. “And
none of the men themselves, or hardly any of them, <span class='it'>enjoy</span>
writing outrageous things. They do it from artistic
duty .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and that’s why it’s all so different from reality,
don’t you think so? And so dull, as well as so disgusting!
Just imagine what it would be like, Wolf, to
have a Jane Austen ready to write of the most scandalous
things! She’d write really mischievously, with zest
and satisfaction, not like a solemn scientific journal.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I’m sure I wish you luck with your ‘Slate,’
Chris! Don’t sponge out anything, though, I beg you. I
mean, don’t tear anything up, however much you revise!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Even while he was uttering this harmless encouragement,
some devilish analytical self-consciousness in him
was noting the fact that he didn’t like the thought of
Christie’s appreciation of any sort of Rabelaisianism.
“Christ! What a selfish, lecherous demon I am!” he
said to himself. “I suppose I want her response to <span class='it'>my
love-making</span> to be her one and only awareness of the
amorous element in life!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He became at this moment intensely anxious to clear
up certain things in his own mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What feather <span class='it'>is</span> that, Christie, that you keep in your
‘Urn-Burial’?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She looked at him very straight now, with the eager,
level stare of an interested child.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A heron’s,” she answered. And then, as if for the
mere pleasure of repeating the word: “A heron’s, Wolf.
I found it just exactly a year ago .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. two months before
I first saw you. I was walking by myself in those
Lunt meadows that you see from the lower road to King’s
Barton. You know where I mean? I was walking by
myself along the river-bank.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf continued to listen intently to every word, as
the girl went on with her story; but even as he listened,
his mind was still struggling with the shock of finding
himself so shamefully possessive as to dislike the idea
of her encountering any sort of amorousness where it
was disassociated from himself. “I really am scandalous,”
he thought. “I’d like her to be virginal in mind,
body, soul, spirit, intellect, nerves, humour!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His thoughts, before she had finished her story, had
wandered a second time from what she was saying. “Is
this interest of hers in these shameless books inherited
from the old man?” he thought. “Is it a vice in her,
like my own?” And his mind recalled the trembling,
drunken ecstasy with which he had read that appalling
book in the library-window.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And so I picked up the feather out of the mud and
brought it home,” she concluded; “but whether the heron
caught another minnow, or whether the hawk frightened
it away for the rest of the day, I shall never know.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wish you’d let me see a page .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just a single
page of ‘Slate,’ ” he said presently. “Somehow I cannot
imagine the manuscript of a real story of yours. I cannot
see you writing it, Chris, nor how you would hold
your pen.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The colour went to Christie’s cheeks. “Oh, Wolf,”
she cried, “don’t .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. don’t ever ask me to let you see
what I write! I love to tell you about it; but I think I’d
die if you ever saw it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, all right .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. all right, sweetheart,” he said
soothingly. “You talk as if I asked to see your shift!
By the way, Chris, I suppose you don’t realize that I
never <span class='it'>have</span> seen that room in there where you spend
your nights?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie smiled with intense amusement at this. She
rose lightly, without a trace of embarrassment, took a
candle from the mantelpiece, threw her cigarette into
the fire, and opened the door into the alcove. A second
door on the further side of this recess she opened with
the same docile unconcern, standing aside to let him
enter, while the flame of her candle flickered in the
draught.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her apparent complete freedom from any self-consciousness
as she did all this had a complicated effect
upon Wolf’s mood. It made it possible for him to sit
down upon her bed, and to stare in silence at the darkness
between the white curtains of her window. It made
it possible for him to ponder as to what her feelings and
thoughts were, night by night, left to herself in this
oblong little room. It made it possible for him to ask
her whether she used the green lamp he saw standing
on the chest of drawers on one side of the mirror, or
contented herself with a couple of candles which, in old-fashioned
Dresden candlesticks, stood on a little table
by the bed’s head. But it also seemed to make any attempt
at love-making curiously difficult!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie slid down into a chair between the little table
and the window; and as she did so she explained to him
that she used the lamp till she was actually in bed, and
then lit the candles to read by.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve often wondered,” she said to him, “whether you
can see my light as you come home from King’s Barton.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And I’ve often wondered,” he answered, “which of the
lights I’ve seen from the top of Babylon Hill was yours.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We neither of us know,” she said sadly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Neither of us,” he echoed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The flame of the candle she had picked up from the
parlour-mantelpiece was now blowing sideways, and the
grease guttering down. “I’ll light the lamp and then
you’ll see how it looks,” she said eagerly. “It’s not an
ordinary green. It’s a peculiar kind of green. I wish
we did know whether it could be seen from Babylon
Hill!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf turned half-round on her bed and let his shoulders
rest against the woodwork above the pillow. There
he watched her as she stood with her back to him at the
chest of drawers, busied with the lamp. As the green
light slowly awakened into being, there came over him
an overpowering sense of this fleeting moment. Christie’s
small head, dark and dainty in that emerald-coloured
glow, the shadowy nape of her little neck, the dusky fall
of her straight sepia-brown dress, hovered before him at
the end of that white bed, like things seen in a magic
crystal. He dared not breathe lest he should break the
spell! It may have been that unusual greenish light,
glimpsed across the old-fashioned counterpane stretched
before him like an expanse of shining water, or it may
have been a hovering emanation from some old forgotten
dream, unfolding, like an invisible nocturnal flower,
from the girl’s pillow. He could not explain it. But whatever
it was, the sight of her there, bent down over that
lamp’s wick, enthralled him with a feeling he had never
anticipated, with a sense of the possibilities of <span class='it'>new</span> feelings
beyond anything he had known! When his normal
consciousness came back to him, it came back with a
heavy sigh; and with it came the thought, like the galloping
of a black horse against the horizon, that when
this girl was dead and he was dead, <span class='it'>that</span> was the absolute
end! Dreams of anything but of such an end were
fancies—pitiful human fancies! Moments as perfect as
this <span class='it'>required</span> death as their inevitable counterpoise.</p>

<p class='pindent'>With a furtive movement of his shoulders he suddenly
found himself meeting the girl’s steady gaze, as her
face looked out at him from the little square looking-glass.
With her hand still regulating the newly-lit wick
of the green lamp, she was staring directly at him out of
this looking-glass, staring with a fixed, calm, dreamy
stare, like that of one whose mind is full of the end of
some exciting book, just laid down.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Take down your hair, Christie,” he said in a low
voice, as he met this strange gaze. “I’ve never seen you
with your hair down.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She gave him the most whimsical smile at this; but it
flickered away as quickly as it came, and a frown appeared
between her arched eyebrows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t mind,” she murmured, with a sigh, “if you
really want me to. But what’s the use of it, Wolf? My
hair’s not pretty. It’ll probably spoil your illusion of
me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf’s heart had begun to beat now with the old
unconquerable beating, the beat of the rise and fall of
the sea, drawing close to its destined shore. “Take it
down, Christie. I must see you with it down!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Calmly and quietly, having given the shiny little knob
of the lamp its final adjustment, she lifted her thin bare
arms to her head and began to take out her hairpins.
Her movements as she did this had the obedient docility,
humble and submissive, of an Arabian slave.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s position, as he sat on the edge of the bed, with
his back against the woodwork, had grown extremely
uncomfortable. Nothing would have induced him to rest
his dirty boots upon that glimmering counterpane; but
his body was twisted askew in consequence of this self-denial,
and the woodwork hurt his head. This physical
discomfort had the effect of destroying what remained
of that moment of vision, and of once more rousing in
his nerves a spasm of the old tyrannous lust.</p>

<p class='pindent'>From that little oval head by the green lamp the waves
of dusky hair slipped down now to the girl’s slim waist.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, Chris, it’s beautiful! You look perfectly beautiful!”
he cried hoarsely, sitting up straight on the edge
of the bed and stretching out one of his hands towards
her with a fumbling movement. “Come here, Chris, and
let me see you closer!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Moving calmly, and with perfect self-possession, she
came towards him till only a yard of floor divided them.
Then she stopped, fixing him with the same dreamy stare
as if she had been walking in her sleep.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He got up upon his feet now; and between the light
of the candle in the silver candlestick, which she had
put down upon the little table at the bed’s head, and the
light of the green lamp upon the chest of drawers, they
stood looking at each other, like two ensorcerized automatons
under the power of an invisible magician.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had pulled the green lamp, after lighting it, to
the edge of the chest of drawers, so that its globe was
now reflected in the looking-glass, a reflection that seemed
to push backwards in some mysterious way everything
else reflected there. The whole contents, indeed, of the
illuminated mirror seemed to fall into a long, dwindling
perspective, like the outlet from a shadowy cave, a
tunnel-like outlet, full of mosses and ferns and tree-roots,
which were all silhouetted against the round little
circle of empty sky at the end.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Contrary to his own will, which would fain have hypnotized
her to approach him, he found himself glancing
aside from Christie’s steady look, very much as a wild
animal, hesitating whether to leap or not, might turn
aside from the conscious expectancy of its prey.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This avoidance of her eyes gave him a moment’s respite,
during which his glance plunged into the receding
depths of that looking-glass, depths lit up by the lamp
as if by the swollen green bud of a luminous water-lily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Round that green globe little phosphorescent rays
flickered and darted. “If I meet her eyes again,” he
thought, “she will come to me. She will let me undress
her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A strange fear came upon him; and he felt as if he
couldn’t take his eyes away from the looking-glass. Those
darting radiations became like the transparent moons,
surrounded by dim haloes, that move along at the bottom
of ponds under the sticky feet of skimming water-flies.
In the turmoil of his agitation, with the sense upon
him that this was the crisis towards which his life had
been moving for weeks and months, that mirror seemed
no longer to reflect Christie’s bedroom. It seemed to him
to be reflecting the mysterious depths of Lenty Pond!</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind felt as if it were being torn asunder, so terrible
was the swaying of his tight-rope of indecision!
On the one hand he knew that in a moment he must draw
down upon the bed this hushed, submissive figure, standing
thus patient and docile before him. On the other
hand, a mounting fear—a fear that had unspeakable awe
in it, that had a supernatural shudder in it—held him
back. Beat by beat of his heart it held him back. It tugged
at him like a chain fixed to a post.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Slip off that sad-looking dress, I beg you, Chris! Let
me see you all in white!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Had he whispered those words aloud? Had he only
<span class='it'>thought</span> them?</p>

<p class='pindent'>The form he loved best of all was here by his side
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. pliant .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. soft .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. submissive. This bed was <span class='it'>her</span>
bed. They two were alone, without the faintest risk of interruption.
Long ago had the last train from Weymouth
come in!</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was Christie herself who made the next move.
Naturally and easily she slid down by his side on the
edge of the bed .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and then .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what was this? Had
those thin bare arms been raised to her shoulders to untie
the fastenings of her dress?</p>

<p class='pindent'>But still he was staring, obstinately, almost rudely—staring
past her drooping profile into that devilish mirror!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The thought hit him with a kind of mockery how he
had played with that lovely Shakespearean phrase about
a white peeled willow-wand on his journey down to Dorset.
Well, he was in a world of whiteness now. Phantasmal
was the glimmer of her white counterpane .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
phantasmal the whiteness of her profile against the silky
fall of loosened hair. There were white reflections in that
mirror too! It was as if a supernatural musician had
suddenly begun playing a “White Mass”!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Slip off that sad-looking dress, Chris!” Had he really
uttered those words aloud? Or had it been no more than
his heart speaking to his heart? Was one of her fragile
shoulders free now of that dress .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and become white,
as everything else was white, at that fatal moment?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re looking at my mirror, Wolf?” Ah! She was
speaking to him at last! But why did not the sound of
her voice relax the tension? “It’s old, that looking-glass.
It belonged to my mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His eyes seemed to be dimmed now by a film of gauzy
mist, which, as it floated before him, made everything
vague and fluctuating. And then—without a second’s
warning—there appeared, at the end of the reflected perspective
in that mirror on the chest of drawers, the lamentable
countenance of the man on the Waterloo steps!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The pitiful face looked straight into his face, and it
was in vain that he struggled to turn away from it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All the sorrows in the world seemed incarnated in
that face, all the oppressions that are done under the
sun, all the outrages, all the wrongs! They seemed to
cry shame upon him, these things; as if the indecision
that tore at his vitals were a portion of whatever it was
that caused such suffering. He instinctively lifted his
hands to his eyes and pressed his knuckles against his
eyeballs. “Chris!” he cried hoarsely .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “Little Chris!
my little Chris!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just as if her form were being
carried down some receding distance like a lost Eurydice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She moved up closely to his side then, and touched
his clenched hands with her own, not trying to pull them
away from his eyes, but just laying her own fingers over
them. “What is it, Wolf?” she whispered with vibrating
alarm. “What is it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He reeled awkwardly to one side, and, snatching his
hands away from her, sank down against her pillow. For
a second or two the struggle within him gave him a sensation
as if the very core of his consciousness—that
“hard little crystal” within the nucleus of his soul—were
breaking into two halves! Then he felt as if his whole
being were flowing away in water, whirling away, like a
mist of rain, out upon the night, over the roofs, over the
darkened hills! There came a moment’s sinking into
nothingness, into a grey gulf of non-existence; and then
it was as if a will within him that was beyond thought,
gathered itself together in that frozen chaos and rose upwards—rose
upwards like a shining-scaled fish, electric,
vibrant, taut, and leapt into the greenish-coloured vapour
that filled the room!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The part of his consciousness that remained still
clouded seemed quivering with a vision of the girl with
her hands raised to her shoulders in the act of slipping
off her dusky dress; but as his full awareness returned
to him he saw that she had left his side and was standing
by the green lamp, her eyes fixed reproachfully upon
him out of the foreground of that mirror of her mother’s—of
that woman’s who believed in spirits—and her
fingers occupied in fastening up her hair.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Automatically, and with a hand that shook, like a
man’s who has seen a ghost, he took out his packet of
cigarettes and lit a match.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His cigarette alight, he got up from the bed; and
walking with shaky knees across the room—he felt far
more dizzy in the head than under the power of Mr.
Urquhart’s Malmsey!—he offered his packet to her. But
Christie, with eyes whose pupils were so large that they
completely dominated her face, refused his offer with a
wordless shake of her head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl’s hands seemed to him to be shaking too, as
she thrust in the last hairpins and pressed her two
palms against the sides of her small head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come,” she said, “I’ll put out the lamp now, and
we’ll go back to the sitting-room.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they were back by the fire, they both instinctively
drew their chairs close up to the bars and held
out their arms towards the warmth. Long-drawn shivers
kept running through Wolf’s body, as if he had been
drenched in floods of ice-cold rain; and he felt certain
that the slender form by his side was experiencing an
identical sensation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At the moment of seating herself there—it was in a
chair this time, and not upon her four-legged stool—she
had given Wolf a look that filled him with self-reproach.
“I have hurt her feelings,” he said to himself, “in the one
unpardonable way.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Listlessly taking up the silver-knobbed poker from
the side of the fender, he broke a great smouldering lump
of coal into blazing flame.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did I,” he said to himself, “actually beg her to undress,
and then, as soon as she began to do it, act like
a madman?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t have done that,” he repeated. “I can’t have
done that to my little Chris.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>The rain seems to have cleared off, doesn’t it?</span>”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he made this remark, he felt as if not he at all,
but some sardonic Lord Carfax, were making it, in cold-blooded
mockery!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hadn’t noticed it,” she answered faintly; and then,
turning her head towards the window, “Yes,” she said,
“it seems to have cleared up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must be,” thought Wolf, “the most heartless, self-centred
brute in Dorsetshire. Mr. Manley must be a
considerate man of honour compared with me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The wind’s still blowing,” he said aloud. “Wind
without rain,” he said, “is a different thing altogether
from wind <span class='it'>with</span> rain. Don’t you think so, Chris?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Very different,” murmured the girl, almost inaudibly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I’d made love to her, in there, on her bed,” he
thought, “would it have meant <span class='it'>everything</span>? And if it <span class='it'>had</span>
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. would we have been miserable like this, or happy?”
He turned his chair round and reached over to the sofa,
picking up the volume of Sir Thomas Browne.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let me read to you a little, Chris dear,” he said
gently.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“As you like, Wolf,” came the faint response, as she
propped her chin on the palms of her two hands and
stared into the fire.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned the pages of the book, sadly and slowly,
carefully moving the grey heron’s-feather to the middle
of the “Religio,” where it would not be disturbed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he came to one of those majestic, far-echoing
passages—passages that had always struck him as superior,
after their fashion, to anything else in literature,
except certain single lines in Milton—he set himself to
intone the familiar cadences in a low, monotonous singsong.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He dared not give more than a furtive glance now and
then at the delicate profile beside him; but his impression
was—whether a true or a false one he could not be
sure—that Christie was not unaffected by those plangent,
cosmogonic litanies.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As for himself, as he read on, it seemed to him that
the bitterness of their fate did soften a little. These human
contrarities, were they not, after all, so much sandalwood,
so much cinnamon, burned in the bonfires of
chance, but liberating a sweet, strange smoke, purged of
the worst misery of despair? “But the iniquity of oblivion,”
he read, “blindly scattereth her poppy, and deals
with the memory of men without distinction to merit of
perpetuity. Who can but pity the founder of the pyramids?
Herostratus lives that burnt the temple of Diana,
he is almost lost that built it. Time hath spared the
epitaph of Adrian’s horse, confounded that of himself.
In vain we compute our felicities by the advantage of
our good names, since bad have equal durations, and
Thersites is like to live as long as Agamemnon. Who
knows whether the best of men be known, or whether
there be not more remarkable persons forgot, than any
that stand remembered in the known account of time?
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The number of the dead long exceedeth all that
shall live. The night of time far surpasseth the day, and
who knows when was the equinox? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. In vain do
individuals hope for immortality, or any patent from
oblivion, in preservations below the moon; men have
been deceived even in their flatteries above the sun, and
studied conceits to perpetuate their names in heaven.
The various cosmography of that part hath already
varied the names of contrived constellations; Nimrod is
lost in Orion, and Osyris in the Dog-star.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he murmured these rhythmical dirges with his lips
and got a kind of comfort from them and a doubtful
hope that Christie did too, his own mind—like hers no
doubt—went circling the bruised ground of their trouble,
of this wretched dilemma of his, like a dragon-fly hovering
over a stagnant pool.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must have,” he kept thinking, “the most selfish and
heartless soul in Dorsetshire. Mr. Manley of Willum’s
Mill must be far more aware of other people’s feelings
than I am! Oh, God, what would Carfax say <span class='it'>now</span>? He’d
say, ‘So this is your delicacy—this is your precious consideration—to
hurt a girl’s feelings by your bloody
equivocations far worse than by all the ravishings in the
world!’ ” As little by little the opiate of Sir Thomas’s
rhythms soothed his remorse, he shook away the thought
of Carfax. But Jason’s “Lord in London” had no sooner
vanished than his father’s skull took up the tale. “Your
metaphysical virtue, my most moral son, has caused
more unhappiness this night to this Love of yours than
all my sensuality ever caused to any woman! And what’s
all the fuss about? Nature can right herself. Nature can
justify herself. It’s these withdrawings and shirkings that
do the harm!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he went on intoning the sonorous sentences with
half his attention, Wolf seemed to see himself, under
those imaginary strictures, reduced to the meanness of a
cowardly hypocrite. His mother’s hard, gallant voice
joined in the chorus. “I have only one word for you,
Wolf,” he heard her say, “and that is contempt!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But underneath all these fanciful upbraidings, underneath
the real comfort of his chanting of “Hydriotaphia,”
there steadily went on gathering itself together, in
the subsoil of Wolf’s being, a certain obstinate recovery
of his secret soul.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It was my snatching at you like that,” he whispered
to Christie, in an unspoken dialogue, “that was the
wicked thing! I should have made you far more unhappy
if I hadn’t seen that face. That face saved us both, and
Gerda too!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>What kept hitting him to the heart as he glanced
sideways at Christie’s profile was its innocence. “She
doesn’t look like a grown woman whose deepest self-respect
has been outraged,” he said to himself. “She
looks like a proud little girl whose hidden fairy-tale has
been violated by some heavy-footed elder.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was honest enough with himself, in the midst of
all these criss-cross communings, to recognize that there
was, somewhere within him, a furtive upwelling of profound
gratitude to the gods. His life-illusion <span class='it'>had</span> been
given back to him! He was still the same Wolf Solent
who had seen that face on the steps, who had seen that
animal feeding in the paddock at Basingstoke, who had
heard the milk-cans clattering on the platform at Sandbourne
Port. He would not have to return to Preston
Lane, to take up his burden, with his soul a shapeless
lump of whale’s blubber! He was still himself. He was
still the old Wolf, whose philosophy—such as it was—kept
its hand on the rudder.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O Christie, O Christie!” he cried to her in his
heart, “I couldn’t have been any good to you, I
couldn’t have been myself with you any more, if that
face in your glass hadn’t stopped me! It would have
changed everything, Chris! It would have ruined
everything.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The inner voice of self-dialogue died down, as the
outer voice of his monotonous intoning sank into silence;
and the only sound in the room was the ticking of the
clock and the faint, weird whisper of the wind in the
chimney.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Christie,” he said aloud; and so deep had been the
silence, and so drowned had they both been in their
separate thoughts, that the syllables of her name seemed
to fall into an invisible stretch of water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She lifted her head from her hands and sat up straight,
fixing her gaze upon him in the old, steady, unfaltering
manner.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, Wolf?” she murmured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I want to tell you something, Christie.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he spoke he couldn’t help recalling the advice he
had so often given to Darnley. He had told Darnley to
explain everything to Mattie. Ah, it was easier to tell a
person to explain everything than to do it oneself!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I was reckless just now, Chris. I just snatched at the
chance! It seemed so wonderful our being alone. But
do you know what stopped me? Don’t look like that, my
precious! You’ll understand when I tell you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What, Wolf?” she whispered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The day I left London from Waterloo Station, I saw
a tramp on the steps there.” As he uttered these simple
words he experienced a most curious sensation. It was as
if he were smashing with his clenched hand one of those
glass coverings which on certain express-trains preserve
from casual contact the electric bell that has the power
of stopping the train. “It was a man,” Wolf went on;
“and the look on his face was terrible in its misery. It
must have been a look of that kind on the face of someone—though
<span class='it'>his</span> sufferers were children, weren’t they?—that
made Ivan Karamazov ‘return the ticket.’ But all
this time down here—<span class='it'>that</span> was March the third—ten
months of my life, I have remembered that look. It has
become to me like a sort of conscience, a sort of test for
everything I——” He stopped abruptly; for a spasm of
ice-cold integrity in his mind whispered suddenly, “Don’t
be dramatic now!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A test for everything you——” Christie repeated,
showing more spirit in her expression than he had seen
there since they returned to her sitting-room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, a test for tonight, anyway!” he added, with the
flicker of a smile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She pondered for a minute with puckered forehead.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Enough to make me do up my hair again!” she said,
while little wrinkles of amusement began to appear at
the corners of her eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He longed to ask her whether she had actually heard
him beg her to take off her dress. He felt completely confused
about that whole scene in her bedroom—confused
as to what he had said and what he had only wished to
say. Most of all he felt bewildered as to what <span class='it'>her</span> feelings
had been between that green lamp and that glimmering
counterpane! Had she really lifted those cold bare
arms, that he looked at now, so calmly, to unfasten that
old-fashioned gown?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He decided, as he glanced at her shoulders at this
moment, that it <span class='it'>would</span> have been those particular fastenings
she would have to unloose to get off the brown
dress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wonder whether our time together tonight,” he said
bitterly, “will have helped to make your writing more
what you want it to be and less of the sort that ‘copies
men’?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie gave a faint toss of her head and a faint tilt
of her arched eyebrows. She got up from her seat and
shook out her wide brown skirt with both hands. The
combination of these gestures filled Wolf with discomfort;
for it was as if he had said to her something so
brutal that she had to shake it from her petticoats, like
burdock-seed or cuckoo-spit!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I really was serious, Wolf,” she said gravely, “when
I told you just now that I’d almost sooner be dead than
read to you anything I’ve written. I’m not even sure”—here
she moved to the window and laid her hand on the
sash of the closed pane—“that I shan’t have to change
its title now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll forget,” said Wolf grimly. “It’s the one thing
I’m good at. I don’t know now whether it was ‘Slate’ or
‘Slates’!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She turned away and lowered the top sash of the
window, letting in a great gust of damp night-air.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The flame of the two candles on the chimneypiece
blew wildly to the left; and the third one, in the flat
silver candlestick, which she had brought back from the
bedroom and had put down on her tea-table, began to
gutter so extremely that a solid buttress of white grease
formed itself against its side. Many loose pieces of paper
were swept off their resting-places and were blown
across the floor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I should think you’d aired your room enough already,”
remarked Wolf, pressing his knuckles against
the volume of Sir Thomas so that it should not flutter
as some of the books were doing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It smells of peat-bogs!” cried Christie excitedly, holding
her head out of the window.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It must be a south wind,” he muttered, rising to his
feet and moving one of the flickering candles so as to
adjust its guttering. “It must be blowing across from
High Stoy; so it can’t be peat you smell. I expect it’s
Lunt mud,” he added morosely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Whatever it is, it smells delicious to me,” she answered.
“I wish we were both on the top of Melbury
Bub!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wish we were both at the bottom of Lenty Pond!”
cried Wolf fiercely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She turned at that, startled by his tone, and closed
the window with a jerk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What is it, Wolf? Why did you say that? I should
think I’m the one to say that, not you! Everything that’s
happened this evening has been exactly as you wanted
it to happen, hasn’t it? Why aren’t you satisfied, then?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The indignation in her tone was in a way a relief to
him. “Let’s have the worst,” he thought. “Better in the
open, while I’m here, than after I’m gone.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Christie,” he began, “I <span class='it'>have</span>, I know, thought only
of myself .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and yet I <span class='it'>do</span> love .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you know I <span class='it'>do</span>
love you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She looked at him scornfully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What you always do, Wolf, is to get out of things
by accusing yourself .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but if you really <span class='it'>felt</span> what
other people feel, you would——” She broke off. “Oh, I
don’t know what you’d do! But at least you wouldn’t be
having it both ways.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Almost automatically, in spite of his remorse, something
seemed to shut up within him like the shutting of a
door that closes inwards.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re unfair——” he murmured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her eyes flashed. “Everything that happens,” she cried
passionately, “is only something to be fixed up in your
own mind. Once you’ve got it arranged <span class='it'>there</span>, the whole
thing’s settled .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. all is well. What you never seem to
realize, for all your talk about ‘good’ and ‘evil,’ is that
events are something outside any one person’s mind.
<span class='it'>Nothing’s finished</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. until you take in the feelings of
everyone concerned! And what’s more, Wolf,” she went
on, “not only do you refuse <span class='it'>really</span> to understand other
people; but I sometimes think there’s something in you
yourself you’re never even aware of, with all your self-accusations.
It’s this blindness to what you’re really doing
that <span class='it'>lets you off</span>, not your gestures, not even your
sideway flashes of compassion.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A certain direct and childish humility in Wolf’s nature
came to the surface now under this attack.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I expect all that you say is true, Christie dear, and
that you are ‘letting me off’ yourself, in spite of what
you say, lightly enough, if all were known. I’m a strange
one, I suppose, and there it is!” He smiled ruefully.
“But we’re a fair pair when it comes to that, aren’t we,
my dear?” he added. “And all the same, if I hadn’t seen
that face——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>All the fire of her indignant arraignment seemed to
die out at these words; and as her frail figure sank down
on the rose-embroidered sofa, it seemed to be entirely
divested of any spirit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If that man’s face,” she sighed wearily, “hadn’t appeared
to you I should have known tonight——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved a step towards her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s that, Christie?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She leaned forward and her eyes narrowed between her
eyelids in an expression he had never seen on her face
before. Then she continued, with a peculiar solemnity,
almost like a young neophyte repeating a fatal ritual,
“I should have known .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. tonight .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. now
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. shall .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. never .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. know!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Staring at that little oval face, with that strange expression
of finality upon it, he muttered huskily: “Christie,
Christie, I love you. I love you.” His voice had a
groaning intensity, like that of a branch creaking in a
storm. “I have been thinking only of myself. But I love
you, Christie! I love you more than anyone in the
world!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She looked steadily into his face; and thus they
waited, listening as before to the weird wailing sound
that the wind was still making in the chimney.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This whistling of the wind brought suddenly to his
mind that night at the pigsty when he had gathered together
his deepest powers of resistance. He burst out with
his favourite quotation from King Lear: “The goujeres
shall devour them, flesh and fell, ere they shall make us
weep! We’ll see ’em starve first!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He caught her hands and drew her up to her feet with
a flashing look that was almost exultant: “He that parts
us shall bring a brand from heaven and fire us hence
like foxes!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he released her, a most whimsical and penetrating
smile flickered over her face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I believe that something has happened tonight, or
has not happened, that has taken some great weight off
your mind!” she said. “Is that it? You look relieved and
relaxed .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. different altogether from when we had
supper.” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. As she spoke she glanced at the clock, and
his own eyes followed. Together they realized that it was
a quarter to twelve.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, what will Gerda do?” he cried. “Christ! she’ll be
so vexed!” Blankly and irritably he looked at Christie;
and in that expression of confused dismay there was—and
he knew well enough there was—a faint tinge of reproach.
But the girl was apparently too tired to notice
this.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was unable to catch the faintest irony upon her
anxious, sympathetic face, as she let him out by the little
side-door into the street. It did occur to him, however,
as he strode rapidly down the echoing High Street, to
wonder a little uneasily what kind of expression her
face would wear when, alone in her bedroom, she looked
at herself in her mirror. It was not, all the same, till he
was opposite Mrs. Herbert’s darkened house that the full
poignancy of one of her remarks hit him with its barbed
arrow-head. “I wonder if that <span class='it'>will</span> be her destiny,” he
thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She was perfectly right about my selfishness, though.
What a brute I am! Oh, my true-love Christie! What I
do make you put up with in one way and another!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stopped when he reached the pigsty; for there was
the light in Gerda’s bedroom!</p>

<p class='pindent'>How different this home-coming was from all that he
had expected! Well, that was the way things worked out!
Instead of either of the great clear horns of Fate’s
dilemma, a sort of blurred and woolly forehead of the
wild goat Chance!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had managed to keep his life-illusion. His precious
“mythology” could live still. But at what expense?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If you hadn’t seen that face, I should have known
tonight what now I shall never know!” O fool .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. fool
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. fool!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He crossed the road with dragging steps and opened
the little iron gate as quietly as he could.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I have thought only of myself,” he muttered, as he
shut the gate behind him; “and yet I love you, Christie.
I love you! I love you!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap21'>“SLATE”</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>All through January and February Wolf lived out
his life with obstinate, stoical acceptance. He led his
pupils at the Grammar School patiently and thoroughly
through the reigns of Richard II and Henry IV.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His interviews with Christie had grown gentler and
tenderer, though in some ways sadder, since that night
of “Mr. Malakite at Weymouth”; and whatever deception
of Gerda they still implied, Gerda herself gave no
sign of suspicion with regard to them. His mother’s new
tea-shop, furnished with money borrowed at reasonable
interest from Mr. Manley, had already proved itself a
most promising venture; and Mrs. Solent’s spirits, as
the weeks passed by, were steadily rising. Wolf had
worked at top-speed during those two months at Mr.
Urquhart’s book, writing every day between tea and their
late supper at the little card-table by their parlour-fire,
while Gerda read a series of romantic tales.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Almost to his own surprise—and certainly to Mr. Urquhart’s—the
“History of Dorset” showed signs of drawing
to its close. Writing day after day from seven o’clock
to ten o’clock, Wolf had come to hit upon a style of
chronicling shameful events and disconcerting episodes
that cost him less and less effort, as the weeks advanced.
What really gave him impetus was a trick he discovered
of diffusing his own resentment against the Power behind
the universe into his commentaries upon these human
aberrations unearthed by his employer! The more
disgust he felt for his task, the more saturnine his style
became and the faster he wrote! Some of his sentences,
when he revised them in cold blood, struck him as possessing
quite a Swift-like malignity. He astonished himself
by certain misanthropic outbursts. His habitual optimism
seemed to fall away at such times, and a ferocious
contempt for both men and women lay revealed, like a
sullen, evil-looking, drained-out pond!</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a surprise to him to find that this business of
writing “immoral history” lent itself as well as it did to
his natural method of expression. Each time he carried
his new quota of pages up to King’s Barton Manor, Mr.
Urquhart seemed more delighted than the time before.
“Stick to the facts .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. yellow Menelaus .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. stick to
the facts .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and we’ll show ’em for all time .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. eh,
me boy? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what our ‘wold Darset’ is made of!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As February drew to an end, it became more and more
probable that the anniversary of his reappearance in his
native land—the third day of March—would be, as he
wished to make it, the date of the book’s completion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As to Mr. Urquhart’s cheque for two hundred pounds,
it still remained where Wolf had first placed it—under
the stomach of Mukalog at the bottom of that unused
dresser-drawer in Gerda’s kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Several events of importance occurred during those
two months of exhausting work. One of these was the
acceptance, under Lord Carfax’s patronage, of a small
volume of Jason’s poetry by a well-known publishing-house.
Not only were these poems accepted, but Jason
received—so highly were they praised by the inner circles
of London taste—the sum of fifty pounds as an
advance royalty, an event which, when it occurred, a
few weeks after the book was taken, seemed to impress
the author himself a great deal more deeply than the
many tactful letters that reached Pond Cottage from
“that lord of yours in London.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Even more pleasing to Wolf than the success of Mr.
Valley’s suggestion about Jason’s poetry was the upshot
of his own advice to Darnley about his relations with
Mattie. These two were definitely going to be married on
the first Saturday in March, a day that happened to occur
just one day after the anniversary of his own appearance
on the scene. T. E. Valley had already begun reading
their banns in the church; and on the strength of his
approaching marriage, Darnley had obtained a small
rise of salary at the Blacksod Grammar School.</p>

<p class='pindent'>On Saturday, February the twenty-fifth, Wolf awoke,
after writing very late into the night, to a happy consciousness
that Mr. Urquhart’s finished manuscript lay
on the card-table in their parlour!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Saturday was a “whole holiday” for the Blacksod
boys, although for Ramsgard it was only a “half,” so
that Wolf had a solid expanse of forty-eight hours before
him of delectable idleness before his work began
again on Monday. The following Friday, the third of
March, was the eventful day when, just a year ago, he
had arrived in Dorset; and on the day after that, a week
from this morning, Darnley and Mattie were to be married.
Wolf surmised that there must have been some
eventful conversation wherein Darnley had “explained
everything”; and it was apparently accepted at Pond
Cottage that the rise in Darnley’s salary—little as it was—would
smooth over every new economic strain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I shall take the book to Urquhart after breakfast,”
were the first words Wolf addressed to Gerda when she
opened her eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And then we can change that cheque!” responded the
girl, excitedly. “I’ve not teased you about it, Wolf; because
I know what men are like. But now it’s done! Now
it’ll be just the same as if he gave it to you today, won’t
it? We can change it at Stuckey’s this afternoon, if you
get back in time. No, I forgot. It’s Saturday. Well, we
can change it on Monday, anyhow. Oh, Wolf, what a
good thing your mother didn’t need this money! I’m
going to buy a new carpet for the parlour and a set of
dinner-plates and a new frying-pan and two pairs of
sheets and a set of silver spoons—oh, and something else
that I’ve always wanted, Wolf, and that’s a grandfather’s
clock for the kitchen—same as Mother has!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s face clouded. “I’m sorry you brought up that
cheque, honey,” he said. “I’ve not made up my mind
about it. I’ve got an odd feeling about it. In fact, I have
an idea that we’ll all be much happier, much more lucky,
if I just tear it up and hand back the pieces to him!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda jerked herself up on her elbow and looked at
him with flashing eyes. “Wolf! How can you think or
dream of such nonsense? Of course we must change that
cheque! You’ve worked for it. You’ve earned it. Do you
think I’d have been so good and quiet about it if I’d
thought you were going to act like this at the end? I
said nothing when you told me it was for your mother.
I’ve got my pride, though you may not think so; and
I’d have sooner bitten off my tongue than for her to
have said I stopped you from giving her money! But you
never <span class='it'>did</span> give it to her. You just kept it. So I made sure
it was only that you didn’t want to be paid till you’d
finished the job. And now you go and talk like this!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s mind was so bewildered and nonplussed by
this unexpected outburst, that he just stupidly straightened
out the sheet, which had got rolled into a weft
under his chin, and slipped slowly out of bed. He certainly
<span class='it'>had</span>, as she said, completely misunderstood her
silence about the cheque. Well, here was a new complication.
But he must gain time to think. Perhaps, sooner
than disappoint her as much as this, he <span class='it'>would</span> relinquish
his idea of “getting even” with his employer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After all, he would be glad enough, himself, to have
two hundred pounds at his disposal! He had already
spent a third of all his and Gerda’s savings in the purchase
of a cut-glass decanter and a set of wine-glasses
for Darnley and Mattie. It would be riches to have such
a sum as this added to their account in the Post Office!
All he knew was that ever since he had wrapped the
cheque about the belly of Mukalog he had been profoundly
unwilling to touch it. The thing seemed unholy
to him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. unholy. It was a sort of blood-money for
the sale of his “mythology.” He had pilfered back this
precious possession .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. desperately, cowardly, meanly
done so .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. by his equivocal behaviour to Christie.
To fling down the torn bits of the cheque upon Urquhart’s
table would be an equivalent for many snake-like
turns and twists!</p>

<p class='pindent'>But in spite of these thoughts he felt at that moment
an uneasy stirring of self-reproach. He had treated Christie
abominably the night before. Was he going to treat
Gerda still worse today? “It’s all very well,” he said in
his heart, “to follow these niceties of honour for my own
sake. But how arbitrary, how monstrous, to snatch this
money from Gerda when it means so much to her!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There’s something in what you say, sweetheart,” he
muttered aloud; and he began wrapping himself in his
dressing-gown and tightening it round him in the way
he liked to do, preparatory to opening the door. “Don’t
get the idea I’m going to be silly or obstinate!” he added.
“We’ll discuss it all later.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There seemed to be a cold wind from the east that
morning; and Wolf, when he reached the kitchen, was
glad enough to find the stove still alight. But just for
the sake of getting into the air he unbolted the back-door
and shuffled in his slippers across the yard. “I’ll
fetch two or three pieces of wood,” he thought. The shock
of the east wind cutting at his lean frame and whistling
past it as if it had been the post of a clothes-line, roused
a grim and yet an exuberant feeling in him that sent
him back to the kitchen in high spirits.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ay!” he thought, “how it all depends on these little
things! What was that that Mother told me about Carfax?
That he used to ‘play’ with these accidents, like
a fisherman with a trout, making ’em serve his sensations!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Back by the side of the stove he gave himself up to
enjoying the flames that came out of that round iron hole.
“Jason was certainly right when he said that to have a
roof over you, and a fire to get warm by, and three meals
a day, was enough to be grateful for in this world.” And
what about the straight, sweet, flexible body of Gerda?
Wouldn’t he be a fool if he let his craving for Christie
kill every element of natural pleasure? And after all, he
<span class='it'>had</span> Christie. Had her, at any rate, in a sense that was
as important to his imagination as Gerda’s body was to
his senses!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He covered up the iron hole with the bigger of their
two kettles. This extra-large kettle was a recent present
from Gerda’s mother; and Wolf suspected, perhaps unfairly,
that the gift was an insult to their hand-to-mouth
household! He ran upstairs after adjusting this kettle,
and with his back to Gerda, who still lay supine, with
the blankets tight under her throat, he began his slow
process of shaving, while a thin inrush of bitter cold
through an inch of open window kept alive the taut
stoicism of his mood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You needn’t think I’ll get up while the room’s as
cold as this,” cried Gerda crossly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right, sweetheart,” he said; “don’t get up. It
doesn’t matter.” But he thought in his heart: “Unselfish
or selfish, we are all forced to fight for our own hands!
If I’m selfish in being happy this morning, if I’m heartless
in enjoying this heavenly east wind, I can’t help it!
If no one were allowed to be thrilled by anything, as long
as someone is made wretched by something, the life of
the whole planet would perish!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But his blessedness, whatever its nature was, was
brought speedily to an end by Gerda’s voice from the
bed behind him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If you don’t change that cheque, Wolf,” came her
words, “I simply won’t live with you any more! I’m
tired of the life we lead .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and it seems to me that
it gets worse and worse, instead of better!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At his own image in the glass Wolf made a vicious
grimace. But he held his tongue. What a different looking-glass
this was from the one inherited from the woman
who “believed in spirits”! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But he held his tongue;
and by various crafty tricks he turned her thoughts to
other channels. It was not till the middle of their breakfast
that he deemed it advisable to refer again to the
two hundred pounds.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m afraid I must take that cheque back to Urquhart,”
he remarked abruptly. “I have to live with myself,
Gerda, as well as with you; and I couldn’t endure myself
if I thought I’d been paid for a thing like that
book.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She put down her porridge-spoon and stared at him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why did you do it, then, if not for the money .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
working every night and not speaking a word! Do you
think <span class='it'>this</span> is any life for a girl?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He made a stupendous effort to put a caressing tone
into his voice. The justice of her outcry had, however,
hit him pretty shrewdly; and feeling ashamed of himself
he began to lose his temper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s hard, I know,” he said, “Gerda honey, to make
you understand. I felt on my mettle to get the thing
done. And I <span class='it'>wanted</span> to do it. And in the way I’ve done
it, it isn’t such an awful thing.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t care what it is!” she cried. “It’s not the book
I’m thinking about. It’s the money. Oh, I do so want to
get those plates and that clock! Do be reasonable, Wolf
darling!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She must have made as great an effort as he had
done, to take this gentle tone, and he recognized fully
the pathetic justice of her appeal; but something obscurely
and dangerously obstinate in his nature seemed to
rise up against her, something that he could actually feel,
like a physical pressure, at the back of his windpipe.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I won’t say I’ll tear it up, Gerda, and I won’t say
I <span class='it'>won’t</span> tear it up. I know you do want those things, and
I want you to have them.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The middle of their breakfast seemed likely to be the
end of it too; for both of them, with simultaneous instinctive
movements, pushed back their empty porridge-bowls
and got up from their chairs, facing each other
across the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I <span class='it'>do</span> want you to have them!” he repeated. “And
you’re not playing fair if you think I don’t! It .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it
goes much deeper than plates or carpets or clocks!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His voice had risen now, and to his own surprise he
found his lip trembling. What he felt was: “How <span class='it'>can</span> she
force my hand when she sees it’s so serious to me?
How <span class='it'>can</span> she do it when she sees that it’s a matter of
life and death to me how I act with Urquhart? How
can she care so little whether I’m tortured by this cheque
or not?” That particular word “tortured” seemed to
form itself into a wicked pellet in his throat, rising up
from the nameless pressure at the back of his gullet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I never thought,” she cried, “that you weren’t going
to be paid! And I sitting so quietly every night and
having no life at all!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then, as he only fumbled with his unused knife and
stared heavily at her, “It’s just what I expected from
you, Wolf,” she went on, a hard, mocking smile coming
to her lips. “I’ve always known you were the
most monstrously selfish man any girl could live
with!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>That ugly pellet in his throat became a rough piece
of gravel that he <span class='it'>had</span> to spit out or it would choke him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How can you care nothing about my deepest feelings,
Gerda?” he cried loudly, while the trembling of his fingers
made the knife he held rattle against the porridge-bowl.
“Don’t you see it’s torture to me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. torture .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
torture .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. torture .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to change that cheque?” The
nervous emotion he suffered from had grown to something
out of all proportion to the occasion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Frightened by his outburst, but supported still by her
burning sense of just indignation, Gerda—still a practical
housewife, even at the moment she felt like rushing
from the house—went off to the stove to move aside from
the fire the saucepan in which their eggs were boiling.
Wolf, still shaking from head to foot, strode round the
table, and, advancing to the dresser-drawer, flung it
noisily open. His movement brought Gerda flying to his
side. What ensued then was all so violent and instinctive
that it hardly seemed to register itself as a real occurrence
at all in his agitated brain.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Their clock in
the parlour had, however, barely ticked two hundred
seconds before he found himself standing breathless and
shaky on the pavement before Mrs. Herbert’s house-door,
the manuscript of Mr. Urquhart’s book clutched tightly
in a hand that seemed to be all one single beating wrist-pulse!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must see Mother,” a voice seemed to cry out from
some long-obliterated bruise in the pit of his stomach—some
navel-string nerve of prenatal origin.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “I
must see Mother!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He went to the door, and Mrs. Herbert promptly answered
the ring.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s still at breakfast,” whispered the woman confidentially,
when she’d closed the door behind him. “She
had a visitor last night,” she added. Wolf hung up his
coat and hat on one peg in the little hall, and his stick
upon another peg. Each of these pegs looked like the
head of Mukalog, as he used them. He received a vague
impression that the landlady had jerked an insulting
and libidinous thumb towards his mother’s room before
she went off down the passage!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He knocked, heard his mother’s indolent reply, and
entered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She welcomed him radiantly. She was fully dressed
and looked surprisingly young.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sit down, my dear one,” she said, “and smoke while
I finish my coffee.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt she must have perceived his agitation, but
she made no sign of that knowledge; and as they chatted,
easily and freely, about her new tea-shop, his heart and
his two wrists began to stop their wild dance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>By degrees, under her hypnotic power, he even began
to feel that he had made too much of the whole incident.
Mentally he qualified and softened both his own anger
and Gerda’s anger. “I’ll run in and speak to her before
I start,” he thought. And then: “No! I’d better not begin
it all over again! But maybe, after all, I <span class='it'>will</span> come back
with the cheque changed!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His attention gradually became given up, free-mindedly,
to his mother’s affairs. But he remained touchy
and nervous; and when after a time the talk drifted
round to Mr. Manley, this touchiness reached a climax.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t make you out, Mother,” he said. “Either that
fellow wants to get social prestige by persuading you to
marry him, or you are just exploiting him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. playing
on his infatuation and using him. Whichever way it
is, I don’t like it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Instead of replying to him directly, Mrs. Solent
glanced at the great manuscript-packet, which he had
put down carelessly between her coffee-pot and her loaf
of brown bread.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s that you’ve got there, Wolf?” she asked; and,
though apparently innocent, her question carried for him
a mischievous implication.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“His book, Mother .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Urquhart’s book. I finished
it last night.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her eyes glittered like those of a triumphant witch,
and her bright cheeks glowed like a couple of russet
apples.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A compromise with Satan, little Wolf! Have you
forgotten all you told me when you left him? All that
about his book being simply naughty scandal? Will you
<span class='it'>never</span> face the facts of life, my son? Can’t you accept
once for all that we all <span class='it'>have to be bad</span> sometimes .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
just as we all <span class='it'>have to be good</span> sometimes? Where you
make your great mistake, Wolf”—here her voice became
gentler and her eyes strangely illuminated—“is
in not recognizing the loneliness of everyone. We <span class='it'>have</span>
to do outrageous things sometimes, just because we are
lonely! It was in a mood like yours when you came in
just now that God created the world. What could have
been more outrageous than to set such a thing as <span class='it'>this</span>
in motion? But we’re in it now; and we’ve got to move
as it moves.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She lifted the cold dregs of her coffee-cup to her lips
and drained them with a sigh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go on, Mother,” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She smiled at him—a swift, mysterious smile, neither
bitter nor ironical, but proud and contemptuous, like the
dip of a falcon’s wing in a farmyard-tank.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Every movement we make must be bad or good,” she
said: “and we’ve <span class='it'>got</span> to make movements! We make bad
movements anyhow .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. all of us .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. outrageous ones
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. like the creation of the world! Isn’t it better, then,
to make them with our eyes open .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to make them
honestly, without any fuss .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. than just to be pushed,
while we turn our heads round and pretend to be looking
the other way? That’s what you do, Wolf. <span class='it'>You look the
other way!</span> You do that when your feet take you to the
Malakite shop. You’re doing that now, when you carry
this naughty book back to that old rogue. Why do you always
try and make out that your motives are good, Wolf?
They’re often abominable! Just as mine are. There’s
only one thing required of us in this world, and that’s
not to be a burden .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. not to hang round people’s
necks! My Manley-man, whom you hate so, at any
rate stands on his own feet. He gives nothing for nothing.
He keeps his thoughts to himself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was listening to his mother at this juncture very
much as an unmusical person listens to music, making
use of it as a raft whereon his thoughts are free to cross
far horizons. It was when he heard her say “your father”
that this voyaging stopped abruptly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your father never once,” she said, striking a match
with so sweeping a stroke to light one of her favourite
“Three Castles” cigarettes that he felt as if she’d struck it
on that skull itself, “never once stood on his own feet!
He clung to me. He clung to the Monster. He clung to
Lorna.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf might have interrupted this invective, if a portion
of his mind had not slipped off again to Gerda’s
kitchen. What did she mean by what she said at the end?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He shirked everything,” his mother went on. “He
lapped up the cream of those silly women’s love like a
leering cat. He laughed at people who did anything in
life. He wasn’t afraid of being broken, because there
wasn’t anything in him hard enough to break. He oozed
and seeped into women’s hearts like bad water into leaky
pipes. And he justified himself all the time. He never
said, ‘This is outrageous, but I’m going to do it.’ He
said——” But at this point Wolf began wondering why
his mother kept her window shut when the wind was in
the east.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“East wind is different from all other winds,” he
thought. “Something to do with the roll of the earth,
I suppose.” And he imagined his soul shooting like a
projectile out of that closed window—shooting, whizzing,
darting against the sharp wind, till it reached the
wind’s home. And he visualized the wind’s home as a
promontory like St. Alban’s Head. But his mother was
still going on abusing his father. “How she must have
loved him,” he thought, “to hate him like this after
twenty-five years!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There was no hardness in him, Wolf, no ambition, no
pride, no independence! <span class='it'>He</span> didn’t know what it was to
feel alone! He sucked up women’s life-blood like an incubus;
and nothing would make him confess it—nothing
would make him say, ‘Yes .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it <span class='it'>is</span> outrageous!’ He
justified himself all the time.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf looked away from those fierce brown eyes, out
of Mrs. Herbert’s front-room window, into the cold iron-coloured
sky, a sky swept clean of all softness by the east
wind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m not going to quarrel with you, Mother, about
him,” he said heavily. “I suppose I’m more like him
than like you. But you’re wrong if you don’t think I feel
alone!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My dearest one!” she murmured, with a rich gusto
of tenderness in her voice; and stretching out her
rounded arm, she stroked the back of one of his hands.
As she did this her formidable lineaments assumed the
warm, amorous playfulness of a dusky-skinned puma,
dallying with its first-born in a sunlit glade of the
jungle!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How much healthier-minded she is,” he thought,
“than I am! But so was <span class='it'>he</span>, too, after his fashion. It’s
the mixture of them in me, I suppose, that creates these
miseries of indecision!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, Mother darling,” he said aloud, as he got up
from his seat, and, taking her head between his hands,
kissed her lightly on the forehead. “I won’t tease you
about Willum’s Mill, if you won’t tease me about the
Malakite shop. We’ll agree to be indulgent to each
other’s outrageous behaviour! I’ll try and learn your
philosophy and accept my badness as part of the game.
Good-bye, dear one! I’ll come in sometime tomorrow.”
And with that he snatched up the manuscript from the
table and took himself off.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked back at her window, however, when he was
in the road—and there her figure was, smiling and
kissing her hand to him! “The truth of it is,” he thought,
as he moved away, “she was intended to be a <span class='it'>grande
dame</span>, with a house and servants and guests, with a <span class='it'>salon</span>,
too, perhaps, where political magnates came that she
could chaff and fool and put in their place! It’s action
she enjoys. I can see it all now like a map! Life’s simply
tedious to her when she isn’t stirring. How I must have
disappointed her! How she must have hoped against hope
in those London years!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mother’s personality filled his mind completely,
as he passed Pimpernel’s and steered his way through the
Saturday crowds in High Street. “Her nature’s never had
its proper fling,” he thought. “No wonder she treats
people carelessly and ironically. She’s like a great lioness
whose only food for years has been rats and mice and
skimmed milk! The mere brutality of that fellow appeals
to her. At least it’s something formidable and positive.
I wonder”—here he paused on the pavement, just as
he debouched into Chequers Street—“whether she lets
the brute kiss her.” As this thought began to transform
itself into an impious, unseemly image, he pushed a
sprig of greenery of some kind that someone had dropped
there, with the end of his stick, along the pavement, till
he got it into an empty little space behind some railings,
where a patch of grass was growing. “God!” he said to
himself as he recognized this spot; “this is where I read
her letter the day I ate Yorkshire pudding at the Torps’,
and she first spoke about coming down here! If I hadn’t
sat by Gerda that day and eaten that Yorkshire pudding
and taken her up to Poll’s Camp .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’d have been free
now .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to——” At that point he tossed his
thought away from him. “It’s no good,” he said to himself.
“When Chance has once started things, a sort of
fate sets in that a person <span class='it'>has</span> to accept!” He moved on
again down Chequers Street, observing, as he did so,
however, that a small single leaf still lay on the pavement.
His consciousness of this leaf worried his mind
after he had taken only a few steps. He endowed it—thinking
to himself, “I believe it’s a myrtle-leaf”—with
nerves like his own. He thought of it as being separated
from its companions and doomed to be trodden underfoot
alone. “Damn my superstition!” he muttered, and
forced himself to walk on. But then he thought, “They’ll
be treading on it just at the time I’m talking to Urquhart!”
This brought him to a stand-still, while indecision
took him by the throat. He slipped his fingers into
his waistcoat-pocket. There was Urquhart’s cheque!
After that unthinkable scene with Gerda he <span class='it'>had</span> taken
it from under the stomach of Mukalog.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How can I expect the gods to give me luck,” he said
to himself, “when I leave living things to be trodden
underfoot?” He stood quite still now, paralyzed by as
much hesitation over this leaf as if the leaf had been
Gerda herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I go back and pick up that leaf,” he said to himself,
“I shall be picking up leaves from these Blacksod
pavements till next autumn, when there’ll be so many
that it will be impossible!” He began to suffer serious
misery from the struggle in his mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If I force myself to leave it there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. with the idea
that I <span class='it'>ought</span> to conquer such superstitions .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. won’t it
really be that I’m getting out of rescuing it from mere
laziness and making this ‘ought’ just my excuse to avoid
trouble and bother? I’ll pick it up now,” he concluded,
“and think out the principles of the affair later on!”
Having made this decision, he hurried back, picked up
the leaf, and flung it over the railings after its parent-twig.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But he had forgotten the east wind. That unsympathetic
power caught up the leaf, and, whirling it high over
Wolf’s head, flung it down upon the rear of a butcher’s
cart that was dashing by.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>That</span> wouldn’t have happened,” he thought, “if I’d
left it where it was.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sight of the butcher’s cart made him think of
Miss Gault. “I wonder what that woman feels,” he said
to himself, “now Mattie is to be married instead of going
to a Home in Taunton? Does she realize the amount
of old bitterness that underlies her meddling? But she
<span class='it'>does</span> think herself into the nerves of animals in slaughter-houses
just as I do into the nerves of leaves on pavements.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he moved on he seemed to see the whole universe
crowded with quivering sentiences suffering from untimely
mishaps, and nothing done to help. “I don’t care
if she <span class='it'>is</span> a bad woman,” he thought. “I don’t care if she
is revengeful without knowing it. The more people become
<span class='it'>aware</span> of what goes on, the fewer living things will
be tortured. I hope she’ll never stop putting her nerves
into animals. I love her for it; even if she <span class='it'>does</span> want
Lorna’s child to go to a Home in Taunton, instead of
being married to Darnley!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He arrived now at the Torp yard. It seemed hard at
that moment to hurry by, as he usually did when he
came that way, for fear of a lengthy delay. He glanced
across the yard at the covered shed where the work was
done. In a second he met the eyes of Mr. Torp, who was
resting from his labours with an air of “<span class='it'>Requiescat in
pace</span>.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His father-in-law beckoned him to come in.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, how be?” was his greeting as they shook hands.
“ ’Tis long since Mr. Solent has stepped into me yard.
Though us have seen ’ee, traipsing by, coat-flying as you
might say from hell to wold Horny!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Rather a sharp wind today, don’t you think so?” said
Wolf genially, stroking with his hand the surface of a
large uninscribed tombstone hewn from a block of Ham
Hill stone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“May be. May be. But I be wondrous sheltered in yard
from they cruel winds. ’Tis het I do fear more’n cold,
mister; though I have heard tell that wind be turble
rough on pavement out yonder.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Torp smiled complacently and pulled at his pipe.
He talked of “out there” with the superiority of a man
who lived, sleek and snug, in the company of aristocratic
tombstones. But this slyness and aplomb soon changed,
as he led his son-in-law into the interior of his shed; and
the two men sat down together on a bench covered with
stone-dust.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Say, mister,” John Torp began, “ ’twere only yesterday
that I thought deep about ’ee, dang me if I didn’t!
I were out, passing the sweet of the evening, wi’ old man
Round, to Farmer’s Rest, and who should drop in for a
game of draughts or summat but that there Monk from
up at Squire’s. They be a couple o’ devil’s own, when
liquor’s aboard, them two; and ’twere good I be the
man I be, with a headpiece what no small beer, brewed
by the likes o’ they, can worrit, if ’ee knows my meaning?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf nodded sagaciously, resting his manuscript on his
knees.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Twere along o’ young Redfern them two sly badgers
got to talking, and maybe them forgot I were thee’s missus’s
Dad, or maybe they forgot I were there at all, for
I sits quiet as stone, ’sknow, when I be out from home.
Anyway, they was talking; and what must thik girt bugger
from they Shires say but that since you’ve gone back
to Squire, and have took young Redfern’s place, that
poor lad’s sperrit have been quieted down wonderful.
He were taunting the life out o’ they, seems so, that boy’s
ghostie! But since you’ve gone back, Mister, like a dog
to’s vomit, if you’ll excuse the word, thik sperrit have
let they three parties sleep soft as babes.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Torp paused and glanced nervously round him.
He then took several long, meditative pulls at his pipe.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tweren’t pretty,” he said, looking sideways at Wolf
with half-closed eyes; “ ’tweren’t pretty to hear what
they did say about ’ee.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What <span class='it'>did</span> they say, Mr. Torp? Come on! You <span class='it'>must</span>
tell me now!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The stone-cutter looked about for some imaginary
spittoon and then spat with extraordinary clumsiness
upon the face of the big unlettered headstone in front
of him. Wolf watched the white spittle slowly trickling
down the yellowish surface, and he thought: “What
things there are in the world that have a definite place
in Time and Space! There’s Mr. Torp’s ‘gob,’ as the
Ramsgard boys would say .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and there’s that big
round tear from Gerda’s eyes that I saw this morning on
the back of my hand as we quarrelled about the cheque
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and then there’s that leaf on the butcher’s cart!
Ailinon! Ailinon! What things there are in the
world!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They said,” the stone-cutter proceeded, “that ’twould
be thee wone self what would go next. They said the
thing what made thik poor lad’s sperrit bide where ’a
ought to bide were the comfort of another party going
his way. ’Tweren’t pretty to hear ’un say that, Mister;
and ’twere well I <span class='it'>do</span> sit quiet, in the sweet of me cups,
or they never would have spoke such words. But that’s
what they said; and so now I’ve told ’ee.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He paused and sighed heavily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ve always been what a gentleman <span class='it'>should</span> be to
Gerda’s mother and me! But that’s what them chaps
said.” And Mr. Torp fixed a somewhat gloomy eye upon
his own spittle as it descended the uninscribed headstone.
“A scholar like what you be,” resumed the monument-maker,
“won’t give no credit to the wambling
words of plain men like they. But I bain’t no scholar;
and they notions taunt me mind. ’Tis all very well for
gentlemen to put down their thumbs at Providence. Them
whose brains be work-sodden have to guard theyselves
from He. If ’twere only plagues and pestilences He
showered down, it <span class='it'>might</span> be all one. ’Tis they lightnings,
murders, and sudden deaths what send we to cover .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
same as the poor beasties in field!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf shifted the manuscript upon his knee into an
easier position.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I confess I <span class='it'>did</span> notice,” he said gravely, “about New
Year, I think, that when I went back to Mr. Urquhart
both Round and Monk picked up their spirits. I had
thought Round’s wits had gone for good and all. And
I had thought Monk was getting much more nervous.
But, as I say, I did notice that my going back there
seemed to cheer them all up quite astonishingly! So
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you see, Mr. Torp, I’m not at all ungrateful for
your warning.” He got up as he spoke, and thrust his
burden under his arm. “But the point remains,” he concluded,
with an hilarity that was a little forced, “the
point remains, what ought I to do to propitiate Providence
and escape those terrible occurrences?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Torp moved slowly to a mason’s shelf at the
back of the shed and returned with his chisel. Then,
armed with his professional weapon, the good man
tapped the great slab of Ham Hill stone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tis no comfort,” he remarked, “though I be the
man I be for cossetting they jealous dead, to think that
‘in a time and half a time,’ as Scripture says, I’ll be
chipping ‘Rest in the Lord’ on me wone son-in-law’s
moniment. But since us <span class='it'>be</span> talking smug and quiet,
mister, on this sorrowful theme”—Mr. Torp’s voice assumed
his undertaker’s-tone, which long usage had rendered
totally different from his normal one—“ ’twould
be a mighty help, mister, to I, for a day to come, if ye’d
gie us a tip as to what word—out of Book or out of
plain speech—ye’d like best for I to put above ’ee?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The plump rogue looked up so grave, as he said this,
touching the stone with the point of the tool and staring
at his interlocutor, that Wolf hadn’t the heart to
treat it as the man’s form of humour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll leave it entirely to you, Mr. Torp,” he pronounced
with equal gravity, as he bade him good-bye.
“I’m surprised Redfern hasn’t been content with all
you’ve done for him. I assure you <span class='it'>I</span> shall be! But we’ll
hope that empty stone will have to wait a long time yet
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. for Gerda’s sake! Well, good-bye, Mr. Torp. I
won’t forget your warning, though. I’ll fight shy of
‘murders and sudden deaths’!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He walked off along Chequers Street, chuckling rather
grimly. Absurd though it all was, he was superstitious
enough not to be able to treat that drunken chatter at
Farmer’s Rest with the contempt it deserved.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind began now to revert to that final scene with
Gerda. She had actually used physical force against him
as he took the cheque from under Mukalog, a thing she
had never done before. Her last words, from within the
open door, as he went off, had been uttered from a countenance
streaming with tears. “You’ll be sorry for this,
Wolf! You’ll be sorry for this!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>What had she meant by that, he wondered. Bob Weevil
again! But he had discounted Bob Weevil altogether.
It was just unsatisfied lechery with that boy; and Gerda’s
own words, referring to her coldness to him, had had
the very ring of truth. But one never knew, in these
things! Perhaps at this very moment she was writing
a letter summoning Weevil to their home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had reached the turn to Babylon Hill now, and
for a moment he wondered whether he wouldn’t take
this road and turn off to King’s Barton by those larches!
But he decided against it and walked on. When he got to
the place where the lane leading down to the book-shop
was, he found himself stopping again. “What the devil’s
the matter with me?” he thought. “I feel as if a lot of
invisible wires were pulling me back to this town!
Don’t the spirits want me to take Urquhart’s manuscript
to him? Am I like William of Deloraine, in Scott’s
poem, with the wizard’s volume under my arm?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked at his watch. It was already half-past eleven.
It would be after twelve when he got to the Manor; and
the squire would undoubtedly want to keep him for
lunch. “He’d want to do that all the more if I gave him
back his two hundred! He’d be in a royal good temper
with me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stood hesitating at this familiar point, where he
had so often hesitated before. This, however, was the
first time he had done so on <span class='it'>leaving</span> Blacksod. “I don’t
think it would seem absurd to Christie,” he said to himself,
“if I went in for half-an-hour before going out
there? I don’t suppose it would make her feel that anything
was wrong in Preston Lane?” He put these questions
to himself while he stood facing the east wind,
turning up his collar with one hand, as he clutched stick
and manuscript with the other; and as he did so he
thought once more of William of Deloraine burdened
with the magician’s book.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It always gave Wolf a peculiar thrill thus to tighten
his grip upon his stick, thus to wrap himself more closely
in his faded overcoat. Objects of this kind played a queer
part in his secret life-illusion. His stick was like a plough-handle,
a ship’s rudder, a gun, a spade, a sword, a spear.
His threadbare overcoat was like a mediæval jerkin, like
a monk’s habit, like a classic toga! It gave him a primeval
delight merely to move one foot in front of the other,
merely to prod the ground with his stick, merely to feel
the flapping of his coat about his knees, when this mood
predominated. It always associated itself with his consciousness
of the historic continuity—so incredibly
charged with marvels of dreamy fancy—of human beings
moving to and fro across the earth. It associated itself,
too, with his deep, obstinate quarrel with modern inventions,
with modern machinery, and his resolve, as far
as his own life was concerned, to outwit this modernity—not
merely to resist it, but to outwit it—by a cunning as
subtle as its own!</p>

<p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Damn these indecisions!</span> This accursed difficulty of
deciding, of deciding anything at all, seemed to have
grown into an obsession with him. To <span class='it'>have</span> to decide
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>that</span> was the worst misery on earth!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt a strong reluctance to see Christie just after
he had quarrelled with Gerda. What hit him now most
of all was not her streaming face at the end, nor that
mysterious threat, which he supposed referred to Weevil,
but the single big tear he had glimpsed on the back of
his hand when he shut their dresser-drawer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What he fooled himself now into believing to be his
motive when he <span class='it'>did</span> tear himself from that fatal parting
of the ways and hurried down towards the shop, was his
unwillingness to be landed for lunch with Urquhart.
“I’ll catch him about two,” he thought. “That’s the
lowest pulse of the day! And I’ll get home to tea and
make it up with Gerda at the highest pulse of the day!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>An instinctive desire to avoid setting eyes on Mr.
Malakite led him to go straight to the side-door. What
was his surprise when he found that little postern wide
open! There was the narrow flight of stairs leading
straight up to Christie’s room!</p>

<p class='pindent'>This time he did not hesitate. Stick in one hand, manuscript
in the other, he ran up those stairs. There was
Christie’s door, also wide open! He entered and called
her name, softly and tenderly. No answer! He passed
through the alcove into her bedroom. The cold grey light
lay upon her counterpane like the first light of the
morning upon a smoothed-out winding-sheet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he came out, he caught a glimpse of himself in that
Merlinish mirror, and the expression upon his face gave
him an unpleasant shock. Returning to her room, he
softly closed the door. Then he went to the fire and stood
in front of it, warming his hands. There was a tiny bowl
of white violets on the mantelpiece, with two primroses
among them, one fully out, the other in bud.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He bent forward and smelt this fragile bunch of flowers,
and it was as if he had inhaled the very fragrance
of its owner’s soul. Then, led on rather by a nervous
restlessness than by curiosity, he began wandering about
the room, turning over books and papers. Suddenly, as
he ran the tips of his fingers along the familiar books on
her shelves, he came upon a large, thin exercise-book
wedged in between Spinoza and Hegel. This he pulled
out and mechanically opened, his mind still thinking
more of Gerda and the two hundred pounds than of
what he was doing. But after glancing at a sentence or
two in an idle fashion, all at once he began reading furtively
and guiltily, standing motionless where he was,
and turning the pages with the feverish excitement of a
sacrilegious thief.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had not failed to remark the word “Slate” written
in large printed letters on the first page of the exercise-book;
but what he was now reading was in the middle of
the book, and it was one particular paragraph that
caused him to draw in his breath with a faint rasping
suction. It read more like notes for a book than anything
else; but that might be her style.</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p class='pindent'>“Shame? She felt nothing of the kind! Human tradition meant
little to her. Sacred guilt. Forbidden thresholds. Just <span class='it'>custom</span>!
Just old moss-covered milestones of <span class='it'>custom</span>! But the silence that
followed when his footsteps died away? Drops; one, two, three,
four .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>four drops</span>. Drops of acid on the grooves of a waxed
pattern. A girl’s excited senses rousing desire in old age. What
a curious thing! Filmy butterfly-wings waving and waving; and
old cold lust responding. Curious, not terrible. A chemical phenomenon.
Interesting in a special way. The opposite of tedious
routine! Something startling and primeval. But how curious that
a girl’s senses, excited from one direction, should wave signals in
another! Unconscious. Totally unconscious. Butterfly-wings quivering.
Do thoughts come and go in some strange ‘substance’ called
mind .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or are they all there is? Memory. What is memory if
there’s no ‘substance’? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. She slid down the old slippery groove
into the old deep hole. Forgetting. A girl dissecting memory and
forgetting her shame! Why shouldn’t she forget? He was a very
old man. In a few years, perhaps in less than a year, she would
be looking at his dead face. A few years more and somebody
else would be looking into <span class='it'>her</span> dead face. ‘To live so as to regret
nothing!’ It must have been a young man who said that. A
man, anyway. Remorse as man’s prerogative! Nature. It was in
Nature that girls hid themselves and covered their heads. Nature
has no remorse. Nature has no ‘substance’ behind her thought.
Thoughts without ‘substance.’ One .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. two .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. three .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Three
drops of acid in a grooved, waxed pattern? The girl smiled
into her mother’s mirror. Thoughts without ‘substance.’ Butterfly-wings
quivering. Unconscious signals. Little fool: The old man
meant nothing at all. It was all your——”</p>

</div>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was interrupted in his reading by the sound of
a door slamming below and by quick steps upon the
stairs. He closed the exercise-book and thrust it back.
In his haste, however, he put it a shelf higher. Not only
so, but he left it lying on the top of books instead of
among them. Then he went over to the fireplace.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie came rushing in, her arms full of packages,
her face glowing with the self-satisfaction of a girl who
has done some adroit shopping.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wolf! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You frightened me!” She panted a little
and laid down her parcels on the table. Then she
snatched off her hat and dropped it on the top of the
books.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m so sorry, my dear!” he said lightly, taking her
by the shoulders and kissing her hot forehead; “but I
found the door open and came up. You don’t mind,
Chris, do you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was dismayed to see her eyes turn, like the needle
of a compass, straight to the bookcase.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ve been reading it!” she cried, breaking away
from him and rushing to the shelf. Hurriedly she possessed
herself of the exercise-book. Twisting the thing
in her fingers till it became a veritable trumpet of judgement,
she struck the table with the end of it. “Wolf!” she
cried, “I’m ashamed of you! I knew I’d left it out! I
always put it away because of Father; but I knew I’d
left it out! Directly I saw the door was shut, I thought,
‘Father’s in there, and I’ve left it out!’ And now it’s you
who’ve done it! Oh, Wolf, how could you, how could
you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Perhaps never in his life—not even when he had to
appear before that College Board in London to be reprimanded
for his crazy malice-dance—had he felt so
humiliated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m sorry, Christie!” he blurted out. “It was wrong
of me. I did it somehow .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I don’t know! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. without
meaning to.” He made a feeble movement towards
her, where she stood by the edge of the table, her chin
raised high, her eyes literally flashing, the curved lines
of her lips much redder than usual! He had never seen
her look so beautiful. But her anger frightened and
paralyzed him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I only read a word or two, Chris .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just one sentence
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that’s all.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She swept the table with her doomsday-trumpet. Backwards
and forwards she swung it, as if drawing a furrow
in windy sand; and under its stroke the little volume of
“Hydriotaphia” went whirling to the floor, where it lay
face-downwards at Wolf’s feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf shuffled backwards, expecting at any moment to
see his own manuscript follow “Urn-Burial.” The thought
of the heron’s feather rushed through his mind; but he
didn’t dare to move lest he should vex her further. Foolishly
he clenched and unclenched his fingers and stared
at the band round her waist.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d like to go away from you both!” she cried passionately.
“I’d like to go away, far from everyone, where
no one could find me!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m very sorry, Christie,” he repeated helplessly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To read it,” she began again, “when I wasn’t there
and when you knew what I felt!” Her voice grew husky
now and choked in the utterance. Then a shiver went
through her and her slight frame stiffened. With a long,
scrutinizing look she seemed to stare right through his
fumbling, bewildered consciousness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll go, Christie,” he murmured. “Don’t be too angry.
I say I was wrong to do that. I’ll go now. I only came
in for a minute.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She dropped the exercise-book upon the table; and
pressing both hands upon her face, she drew them apart,
against her cheeks and eyebrows, stretching the soft skin
tight in a grotesque distortion. When her hands fell, after
this, he noticed that the anger had gone out of her. Her
expression had become gentle and sad.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s that?” she said, in a low voice, pointing to
Mr. Urquhart’s manuscript. Wolf hurriedly stooped
down and picked up “Hydriotaphia.” He caught sight
of the feather, lying safe between the leaves, as he put
it on the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The ‘History of Dorset,’ ” he said eagerly. “That
awful book, you know.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He tried to speak facetiously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I gave the old chap’s lechery a twist in my own direction.
It’s still pretty awful, but it’s not just pure
bawdiness any more. In fact, I’d like some people I
know to read it. It’s ferocious. It’s like Swift.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Over Christie’s expressive face, its whiteness blotched
by faint red marks from the violent usage she had given
it, flitted a tender, ironical smile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>You’re</span> like Swift, Wolf,” she murmured, “coming
into people’s rooms and poking among their things.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There, Chris! See what you think of it,” he cried,
pushing the great parchment-bound book towards
her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But she only mechanically turned over its pages.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s nearly a year since I began it, Chris. It’ll be a
year ago next Friday, when I arrived .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. going by the
<span class='it'>date</span>, that’s to say.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She bent her head above the white parchment-covered
book—it was really a form of ledger-book, that he had
bought at the stationer’s in High Street, but he preferred
it to a pile of loose sheets—and when she lifted her face
again, she had an expression exactly like a young archaic
priestess.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Next Saturday, then,” she said, “isn’t only your sister’s
wedding-day! It’s the anniversary of your first coming
to this room .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. of our first meeting.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He made a second rather nervous movement towards
her. But she repelled him by taking up the parchment-book
again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m glad you went back to this,” she said thoughtfully.
“I always had an instinct that Urquhart would do
you some harm if you didn’t do what he wanted.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf laughed a forced laugh. “You unscrupulous little
thing! What if Urquhart <span class='it'>were</span> the Devil .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ought
I to go back to him just the same?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie shrugged her thin shoulders. “My mother
used to tell me,” she said, “that all angels could turn
into demons, and all demons could turn into angels.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Merlin and <span class='it'>his</span> mother!” he threw out; but his face
was as grave as her own. “Christie!” he cried suddenly,
after a pause, “why couldn’t you and I have a day off
together, away from here somewhere? Couldn’t we go
down to Weymouth, for instance? Say next Sunday,
when the wedding’s over? Gerda’s mother always likes
to have her come round sometime on Sunday; so we
shouldn’t feel she was——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was interrupted by a querulous voice calling Christie’s
name from the bottom of the stairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After what he had read in that exercise-book he had
a funny shyness about catching the girl’s eye. But she
swept this aside with sublime unconsciousness. He
couldn’t tell whether she even <span class='it'>felt</span> his embarrassment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-bye, my dear!” she said with a perfectly candid
and affectionate smile. “Father’s getting impatient
for his dinner. Poor Father! He’ll have to wait three-quarters
of an hour .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. well, perhaps forty minutes!”
Thus speaking, she drew Wolf by the hand to the door.
He had already snatched up all his belongings. “Off
with you!” she whispered. “Quick! Quick! Quick! Father
would want you to stay; and I don’t like dinners <span class='it'>à
trois</span>!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He could hear her moving the saucepan over her stove
in the alcove, as he ran down the shaky back-stairs. His
desire to escape from her room without seeing Mr. Malakite
was stronger now than it had been to reach her
room without seeing him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Little did he notice of the people or of the things he
passed, as he walked away from the book-shop! Once out
of Evershot Road, however, his feet dragged slowly. What
he had read in “Slate”—those short, compact sentences—passed
through his mind like depraved choir-boys in
white surplices. “Have I done what she hinted?” he said
to himself. “Have I troubled her senses by my advances
and retreats, until she’s lost something that it’s essential
for a girl to have?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He groaned aloud as he walked, and trailed his stick
along the ground. “What will the upshot be if that old
man <span class='it'>has</span> begun persecuting her <span class='it'>like that</span>?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Bitterly now he reverted to his childish fancy, that his
stick was like William of Deloraine’s spear. As he shuffled
along, he began a deadly interior survey of his mental
state. Like a black fly crawling upon walls and ceiling,
his consciousness set off to explore its own boundaries.
“I have no certainty,” he thought. “I don’t believe
in any reality. I don’t believe that this road and sky are
real. I don’t believe that the invisible worlds behind this
road and sky are any more real than they are! Dreams
within dreams! Everything <span class='it'>is</span> as I myself create it. I
am the wretched demiurge of the whole spectacle.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
Alone .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. alone .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. alone! If I create loveliness,
there <span class='it'>is</span> loveliness. If I create monstrosity, there <span class='it'>is</span> monstrosity!
I’ve got to move this creaking machinery of
my mind into the right position; and then all follows.
Then I can stop that old man from persecuting Christie.
<span class='it'>Then</span> I can make Gerda happy without the two hundred!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A bleak, saturnine disgust with the primary conditions
of all human life took possession of him. The insane
fancy took possession of him that he knew something at
this moment of what the guilty, lonely Power behind Life
knew, as it drove towards its purpose. Was he himself,
then, in league with this merciless thing, that from his
deepest heart he cursed? Did he know what It felt, confronted
by all these shadow-worlds, dream within dream,
each of them unstable as smoke and reflecting only
<span class='it'>thought</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. nothing but circles of <span class='it'>thought</span>?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Just as when his “mythology” was upon him he felt
life surging with magical streams of sweet green sap,
so now it seemed as if he could sink through world after
world and find them all blighted, all poisoned, all corroded
by some perverse defect. The only comfort was
that they were all equally phantasmal! Nothing was
real except thoughts in conscious minds; and all thoughts
were corrupted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Had Gerda really meant by those final words that
she would renew her relation with Bob Weevil? His
mind visualized Bob Weevil now with an obsessed intensity.
He saw his face, his clothes, his yellow boots. He
saw his heavy gold watch-chain. Did the saints teach that
one ought to <span class='it'>love</span>, as well as pity, every living soul?
He could pity Bob Weevil. Bob Weevil had not asked
to be born any more than he himself had. But to love
the Bob Weevils of the world? Well! The great saints
could do that. <span class='it'>They</span> could see the tragic necessity of
birth branding the forehead of each child of Adam with
a ghastly uniqueness! But it was too much to ask of <span class='it'>him</span>
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. too much.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was at this moment in his abstracted progress that
Wolf was confronted by nothing less than the entrance
to the little driveway—pompously entitled “private lane”—that
led to the villa of Bob Weevil’s father.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It must have been <span class='it'>this</span>,” he thought to himself, “that,
like a letter at the door, brought the water-rat to my
mind!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Led by a sudden impulse that he made no attempt
to explain to himself, he proceeded to walk up this “private
lane.” The east wind moaned forlornly through
the laurel-bushes on either side of the path. “He’s invaded
my privacy often enough,” he thought. “Why
shouldn’t I invade his for once?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is Mr. Weevil .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mr. <span class='it'>Bob</span> Weevil .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. at home?”
he enquired of the maid who opened the door. She had
friendly blue eyes, this maid, but she looked amused and
astonished to see him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll go and see if Mr. Bob has come in,” she said.
“Will you take a chair, sir?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She went off, and Wolf sat down obediently. The place
was certainly the coldest, the most cheerless, the most
forbidding entrance-hall he had ever waited in. “I prefer
the Mrs. Torp kind of house to this!” he thought, as
he fidgeted upon his glacial chair and shifted his shoulders
to avoid its pseudo-antique mouldings.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wearily he fixed a lack-lustre eye upon a heavy marble
slab that stood opposite him, supported by carved
alabaster columns. “I suppose,” he thought savagely, as
he struggled against a wave of overpowering gloom, “I
suppose Bob Weevil hardly extends his interest in ladies’
legs to alabaster sphinxes!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not a single object in this entrance-hall pleased him.
As for the gryphon-clawed feet upon which those alabaster
ankles rested, he could feel them raking and combing
at his very bowels! He hugged his parchment-book;
he clutched his stick; but he no longer felt like William
of Deloraine. He felt more like the knight’s dwarf, who
vanished from sight altogether at last, calling out, “Lost!
lost! lost!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Nothing mellow or friendly, nothing either rustic or
urbane, seemed to have touched, even remotely, the
devastating pomposity of this furniture. There was a
tiny, shapeless curl of dust at the side of one of those
gryphon-claws; and he looked at it with positive relief!
There was something reassuring about it. It might have
been in a cottage, in a shed, in his own parlour! It was
a sign that he had not been transported into a place
from which there was no outlet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But even this bit of dust—<span class='it'>dust</span> being something that
at least had an authentic place in human history!—failed
to support him just then in what threatened to
become a veritable dissolution of his being! The spiritual
“aura” emanating from the Weevil mansion attacked
him like a miasma of desolation, blending itself with
Gerda’s anger, with what he had read in Christie’s exercise-book,
and with the thought of having to face Mr.
Urquhart. The strength seemed to ebb out of him. Slowly
he rose to his feet; and turning his eyes from the marble
slab, he stared now at a gilded table, with a fringed
mat upon it, supporting a bronze tray containing a solitary
black-edged calling-card.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He leaned upon his stick and contemplated that card
in an hypnosis of misery. Life seemed entirely composed
of weeping faces, old men sneaking up bedroom-stairs,
tombstones with spittle trickling down, and black-edged
calling-cards. He felt as if the First Cause of the Universe
were a small, malignant grub, radiating a deadly
blight in withering, centrifugal air-waves!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He shifted the weight of the book a little. He shifted
the balance of his stick. He felt as if, with stick and
book, he were journeying through space; while the malicious
grub, out of whose ill-humour time and space
were born, aimed a sour-smelling squirt at him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At this moment Bob Weevil himself came hurrying
down the staircase. Wolf moved across the hall to meet
him, thinking in his heart, “The simpleton must have
been tricking himself out all this while!” for certainly
the suit, the tie, the collar, the socks, the shoes, worn by
the “water-rat” this Saturday afternoon, were at the very
top of Blacksod fashion!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The young man hurriedly apologized for keeping his
visitor waiting. Mr. Weevil Senior, it appeared, was already
eating his midday meal, but Bob had ordered an
extra place to be set, and would Mr. Solent honour them
with his company?</p>

<p class='pindent'>The lunch or dinner that followed was something that
fixed itself indelibly in Wolf’s memory. He decided afterwards
that it was only his preceding struggle with the
inert malice of the inanimate in that appalling hall, that
gave him the power to carry the thing through! Carry it
through, however, he certainly did, and with an adroitness
that amazed himself. For he received a startling
shock at the very beginning. The presence of the old dotard
at the head of the table, mumbling and spluttering
over his food with imbecile gluttony, did not prevent
Bob Weevil from laying every one of his “cards,” if so
they could be called, flat down before his successful
rival! It appeared that Lobbie Torp had turned up half-an-hour
ago—“when I was with Christie!” thought the
visitor—with a note from Gerda inviting Bob to go for a
walk with her that afternoon, “as Mr. Solent was away
and she felt lonely.” Bob Weevil communicated this occurrence
shamelessly, as if it were all natural enough.
“I suppose,” thought Wolf, “it’s perfectly natural to him.
It’s probably not the first time she’s sent for him like
this!” It also struck him that Bob Weevil was propitiating
him by introducing a note of humorous, masculine
camaraderie, while at the same time he was letting it be
clearly seen that he regarded this unexpected event as a
personal triumph.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Can it have been, after all,” Wolf thought, “just a
piece of incredibly subtle cunning, worthy of the father
of all water-rats, that chat about the maddeningness of
girls’ legs? And had Gerda too, after her fashion, fooled
him, as men have been fooled since the beginning of the
world?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Following Bob Weevil presently into his own “den,”
Wolf thought he had never seen so many actresses’ photographs
as he now beheld; and it gave him a reaction in
favour of Mr. Urquhart’s vice, as he tried to avoid this
concentrated feminine ogling from every wall! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
However! He was soon stretching himself out in a low
deck-chair comfortably enough, while his mind, as he
listened to his host’s excited volubility, took its soundings
of the situation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Things were always returning upon him, he thought,
in great irrevocable curves. A year ago he had found
Gerda and Weevil in close association. A year ago he
had been introduced by that old man to his daughter;
and now, after all the intervening changes and chances,
Mr. Malakite was there still, at Christie’s side, and Mr.
Weevil was here still, tricked out in his best, ready for
a walk with Gerda! It gave him a disconcerting feeling,
all this, as if he had been wasting his time in a maze,
that perpetually led him round and round to the same
point!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He wondered that it didn’t strike Mr. Weevil as somewhat
odd, that Gerda should be talking of “loneliness”
and “Mr. Solent being away,” when here was Mr. Solent,
drifting casually round, up “private drives,” within half-a-mile
of her! But apparently Mr. Weevil felt that Saturday
was a day dedicated to the erratic wanderings of
desire-driven humanity! At any rate he took it all for
granted, with the easiest facetiousness, when Wolf finally
shook hands with him in the “private road” and made off
towards King’s Barton.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was with many queer sensations that he stood at
last under that well-known historic porch, waiting for
the answer to his ring. A year ago next Friday he had
come to this place! How hard it was to think of it all as
only a year! It seemed to him as if something in this
Dorset air had the power to elongate the very substance
of Time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Roger Monk opened the door to him. Wolf could see
at once that something unusual was in the wind. The
eye of the man “from the Shires” was hunted and startled.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s wrong, Roger? Has anything happened?” He
put all the nonchalance he could muster into this question,
but in his heart he felt discomfortable misgivings.
Roger Monk carefully and gravely bolted the great door.
He had the air of a man who bars out an army of enemies.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s up there with him. He’s been giving him a bottle
of that Malmsey, same as he gave you, Sir, but I
don’t like it when he drinks with any strange party, saving
of course yourself and his lordship.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who’s with him? Who are you talking about?” enquired
Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Monk bent his head down a little, so as to bring
his face nearer to his interlocutor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t like the way he’s talking to Squire,” he whispered.
“I’m glad you’ve a-come, Sir. Maybe you’ll be able
to do something to stop him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Who <span class='it'>is</span> he?” asked Wolf again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Otter, Sir,” said the servant, straightening his
back. “Not <span class='it'>your</span> Mr. Otter, if I may say so .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the
other gentleman, Sir.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jason, you mean?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man nodded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s been using words to Squire such as I never
thought to hear spoke to he by a human lip.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s Jason been saying, Monk? I don’t see that
it’s any good my going up there, if they’re both drunk?
I know how strong that wine is.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man’s face showed consternation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, Mr. Solent, you wouldn’t desert us when you’ve
come back to us? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. come back at the moment we
need you as never was! Let me have your coat, sir. I’ll
take your parcel, Sir.” And he laid an almost compulsory
hand upon the manuscript-book, which Wolf was still
clutching.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve brought this book for Mr. Urquhart,” said Wolf,
submitting to have his coat and stick taken away; “but
what’s the use, if he’s——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“His book, sir? His book? Is <span class='it'>that</span> his book?” cried
the agitated giant, throwing Wolf’s coat down on an
oaken chest and approaching him as if he held a precious
animal in his arms. “Ghost of Jesus! What a day is this
day! Writ and copied by handiwork! Ghost of Jesus!
But I’m glad to see this day!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His excitement was so great that he ran his fingers
along the surface of the great ledger, stroking it as if it
had a head and a tail!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come along upstairs, Mr. Solent! This is what my
master has need of. Come along upstairs, Mr. Solent!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf followed his enormous figure as he strode up
the stately Jacobean ascent, his hand on the carved balustrade.
When they were outside the library-door, the
man paused and whispered in an inaudible voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I beg your pardon?” repeated Wolf; for behind
that closed door he began to catch the murmured sound
of voices. “I can’t hear what you say, Roger!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man raised his voice a little with a nervous sideways
glance at the closed door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I took the liberty of asking you, Sir, whether you’d
step into the kitchen before you leave us. Old Man
Round’s down there with Miss Elizabeth. They caught
some lad or other fishing out o’ season in Lenty Pond,
and they’ve come to show Squire a monstrous large perch
this lad hooked up. I dursn’t say nothing, because of <span class='it'>he</span>
in there”—and the man jerked his thumb towards the
door—“but maybe they’d like for you to see the fish. I
only mention it, as Miss Martin and our maid be gone
to Weymouth for the day .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so if you’d walk straight
in on us, Sir, afore you leave, ’twould be a kindness!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Certainly I will, Roger. I’ll be very glad to .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. as
long as I don’t have to eat that fish!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Monk displayed a more earnest gratitude in his gipsy-eyes
than the occasion seemed to warrant; and then, opening
the door wide with a sudden jerk, he announced in a
louder voice than usual, “Mr. Solent to see you, Sir!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As the door shut behind him Wolf had a momentary
feeling that the man was there still, holding fast to the
handle, to bar any panic-stricken retreat. But what he
saw now swept Monk and his movements completely out
of his consciousness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hurriedly he moved forward towards the two figures
at the fireplace.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were in the same position as he himself and the
squire had been on that memorable day of the contract;
but now, with this finished book under his left arm and
the two-months-old cheque in his right pocket, the curve
of recurrence leered at him with a sly difference.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Between the two men was the same table, with the
same empty decanter upon it; and the logs upon the
hearth seemed to glow with the same light. But Jason,
instead of being seated, was standing erect, his fingers
tapping the table’s edge and his eyes burning with a
black intensity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The Malmsey,” thought Wolf, “has loosened his
tongue. He looks like an avenging demon.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>What gave Wolf an especial shock was the way Mr.
Urquhart himself was sitting. He sat, indeed, bolt-upright,
but he had twisted himself in some odd fashion to the
side of his chair, against the arm of which his back was
pressed hard. His thin legs were at an acute angle to his
Napoleonic paunch, a distortion that endowed both stomach
and legs with a disturbing separate identity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The final token of abnormality in the man’s appearance
was not connected with his body, however, but with
his head; for to Wolf’s consternation the glossy black
hair upon his scalp had <span class='it'>moved</span>, moved about an eighth
of an inch, pushing the parting over to the wrong place.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart’s mouth was open; but this was not all,
for his thin lips were inward-drawn over the rims of his
gums, and there was a staring intensity of outrage in his
face, worthy to be compared with that peculiar expression
which the sculptor Scopas used to lay upon the hollow
eye-sockets of his figures!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Both men were far too engrossed with what was occurring
to do more than turn their eyes towards Wolf
as he approached. Mr. Urquhart gave a perceptible
shrug with his left shoulder. Jason’s cheek flushed duskily.
But not another sign did either make to greet him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You think you are different from other people,” Jason
was saying, as Wolf came and stood by Mr. Urquhart’s
side. “You think you have deeper feelings, because
you own this big house and keep these servants! You
think your ideas are wonderful, because you’ve got a
great library. You think you have more respect than
other people, because you’ve got money to buy it. You
only asked me here and gave me this wine because those
London newspapers praised me. You’ve always hated
me. You’ve paid your man to spy on me. You’re not
a bit different from your friend Round. You like good
meals. You like watching boys bathe. You like warming
your feet by your fire and thinking how great you are
because your father left you some foreign wine! You’re
exactly the same as everyone else, except that you’ve got
an uglier face. You make a mystery of your life, when
there’s nothing in it to boast about except worrying people
with your nasty fancies! You think your life is grand
and devilish, when all you are is a silly old man with
a boy’s death on your conscience. Yes, on your conscience;
but no more on <span class='it'>your</span> conscience than on anyone
else’s! <span class='it'>He</span> wasn’t upset by you. He hardly gave you a
thought. <span class='it'>You</span> weren’t his friend. He used to laugh at you
with his real friends! He only thought of you as a silly
old man who liked his meals and his glass, just as everyone
does. That’s all you are. You’re no wonderful, mysterious
man of evil. You’re an ugly-faced pantaloon
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just greedy and stupid. That’s what <span class='it'>he</span> thought of
you, when he gave you any thought at all! Why did you
ask me to come here today? Only because you heard that
Lady Lovelace had been to see me, and that there was
an essay about me and my art in the Illustrated London
News! You think it’s grand to have a head-gardener as
a servant, so that you can say, ‘Ring the bell, if you
please! Get me a bottle of foreign wine, if you please!’
Everyone knows the real reason you pay that man to hang
around. Only because you like to feel gentlemanly and
refined in comparison with a great bully like that! Here’s
your new assistant come to ask for his pay, for copying
out your liquorish tales! Do you think he takes any
interest in you really, or cares a farthing for your writing?
Not a jot; not a jot .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. not any more than——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf interrupted him at this point by flinging down
the great white ledger-book on the table. The two glasses
tinkled. One of them hit the side of the decanter with a
silvery reverberation. Jason turned a stony face towards
him. Mr. Urquhart blinked his eyes, moistened his lips
with the tip of his tongue, closed his mouth, and shot at
him a look like that which an experienced trapper, his
right arm in the jaws of an infuriated bear, might cast
towards a faithful dog!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There’s your book, Sir!” cried Wolf, completely disregarding
Jason. “I finished it last night and brought
it straight up to you. It’s really something .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>this</span>
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that we’ve done together! If we can get it printed I
believe it’ll make an impression .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. even on Otter’s
attention.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Otter’s attention” seemed, certainly at that moment,
paralyzed by the great parchment-covered volume, lying
on the Malmsey-stained table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Very slowly he bent down and opened it at random,
letting half the pages lean against the decanter. “You
write like a person who knows Greek,” he said gravely
to Wolf. Wolf bowed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I know Greek too well,” he replied significantly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He means he knows what’s made you abuse me like
this, eh? what, Solent?” And the squire jerked himself
into a normal position, straightening out his legs
under the table and leaning back with a deep sigh of
relief.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt an absurd, an almost sentimental desire to
lay his hand on his employer’s head and adjust that unnatural
parting. So it was a wig he wore, after all; at
least <span class='it'>some</span> of it was a wig!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason bent down still lower over the book, holding the
pages back with two of his fingers while his lips mutely
repeated the paragraph he had chanced upon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope you haven’t brought <span class='it'>me</span> into this history of
yours,” he remarked, after a pause. “I don’t like to be
abused any better than Mr. Urquhart does.” He straightened
himself and placed his hands behind his back. “I
expect,” he went on, “I wouldn’t have talked to you like
that, Mr. Urquhart, if you hadn’t given me your best
wine. For your second-best wine I’d probably have flattered
you as much as Solent does!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Squire disregarded this completely. With a caressing
and rapturous hand he began himself turning the
pages, running his forefinger along certain sentences, as
if he were blind and the letters stood out in relief.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Are you tired with your walk?” Jason remarked,
addressing Wolf, and politely offering him his chair.
“I ought not to have abused anyone like that; especially
anyone who has such good wine,” he added, in a low
meditative voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll see how I’ve managed, Sir, about the way it
ends,” said Wolf, still itching to play barber to Mr.
Urquhart’s disorganized poll. “It ends with the Puddletown
incident; but I’ve added a sort of conclusion .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
rather a bitter one, I fear, but I thought you wouldn’t
mind?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wanted the last word, eh, me boy? It ain’t the first
time you’ve wanted that! No, no, no, no .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Gad! <span class='it'>I</span>
have no objection!” As he spoke, the Squire lifted his
head and stared haughtily at Jason.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Otter,” he said. And his tone caused dismay to Wolf;
for he thought, “They’ll burst out again in a moment!”
“Otter,” he said, “I wish you’d do me the favour of
opening that window over there.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>To Wolf’s surprise Jason made no bones at all about
obeying this request. He went off at once with firm,
steady steps to one of the great mullioned windows. He
went to the nearest one, not the one above Wolf’s old
place of work, but one much nearer; and when he got
to it he turned round, and, with something almost resembling
a friendly chuckle, he called out: “I can’t work
the machinery of these grand windows of yours! Shall I
just unfasten it and let it swing out?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart threw a most whimsical look at Wolf
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. he seemed to have recovered from Jason’s tirade
very much as a piece of elastic that has been stretched
to the breaking-point but has been released in time sinks
back comfortably to its former state.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Unfasten it, my good man!” he cried. “Never mind
what happens! Unhook it and let it go!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason shrugged his shoulders, and, seizing the window-catch,
did exactly as he was bid. The leaded casement
swung heavily on its hinges, was caught by the wind, and
was blown wide open.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Into the room rushed such a blast of cutting east wind,
that Jason came hurrying back to the fire, chuckling,
hunching his back, and making a grimace as if pursued
by demons. The pages of the open book upon the table
fluttered like burdock-leaves in a storm. Wolf closed the
volume and placed the empty decanter on top of it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Now’s the moment,” he thought, “to give him back
the cheque.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Jason pulled a third chair towards the fire. Mr. Urquhart
settled himself deep in his seat, complacent and imperturbable,
crossing his legs and swinging one of his
slippered feet up and down in a manner that indicated
complete self-assurance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf looked across the table at him. “Yes, now’s the
moment to do it,” he repeated to himself. As he made this
decision, he thought of Bob Weevil, dressed in his smart
suit, sitting with Gerda in their parlour. “They’ll never
go for a walk,” he thought, “in this bitter wind.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The whole library seemed full just then of a nipping
air; and he noticed that both Jason and his host began
turning up their coat-collars. But the cold was rapidly
sobering them. That was one good thing! It <span class='it'>was</span> certainly
the moment to do it now; for the Squire’s expression
had an ironical aplomb that indicated the return
of sobriety, and Jason had poured out apparently all
his reservoir of black bile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But, oh, how hard it was to do it! He thought of
Gerda’s longing for the pots and pans, the silver spoons,
the carpet, the kitchen-clock. He thought intensely of his
own desire for a dozen bottles of Three Peewits gin.
Damn it all! The whole idea of giving it back was fantastic
and superstitious. Yes, that’s what it was—superstitious.
And it was pure selfishness too. Gerda was doing
everything for him—what right had he to rob her
of their earnings? Those quiet evenings she’d given him
for the last two months were what had finished the job.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They’ve asked me to send them another volume of
my writings,” remarked Jason suddenly. “What do you
two advise me to say I’ve got to have, before I send it?
Darnley thinks a hundred pounds wouldn’t be too much.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Two hundred,” murmured the Squire, with a sly
glance at Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Let’s have your opinion, Solent,” continued Jason.
“You’re one of these cunning dogs who know what’s
what!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In a flash Wolf had jumped to his feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Urquhart,” he cried, pulling the bit of paper
from his pocket and spreading it out before the squire,
“here’s that cheque you gave me! I haven’t cashed it
and I’m not going to cash it. I’ve done your work for
my own pleasure. I don’t want a penny for doing it!
You see it’s the same cheque, don’t you? Well .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. here
goes!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he spoke he crumpled up the precious slip in
his fingers; and, just as if he were retreating to make
some tremendous leap, he stepped back a pace or two
from the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The east wind was whirling round and round the
room; and both of the men, sitting huddled by the fire,
lifted their heads to look at him over their turned-up
collars.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But as Wolf jumped back, crumpling the cheque, what
<span class='it'>he</span> looked at was not the face of the Squire, but the face
of Jason.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he lifted his hand, something at the very bottom of
his soul fought for release. Jason’s face at that moment
was a thing he had to challenge, to defy, to surmount.
The man’s eternal derision of him had suddenly swollen
up, towering, toppling, tremendous .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. like an ice-wall.
It had been gathering weight, this wall, for months
and months; and here it was! His impressions moved
more rapidly at that moment than light-waves travelling
from Betelgeuse or from Algol; and one of these vibrations,
flashing through his mind, hinted to him that the
menace to his “mythology” which Dorsetshire had
brought, came through Jason and not through Mr. Urquhart.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. here goes!” And he flung the crumpled-up
bit of paper over the table, between the two men’s heads,
straight at the blazing logs!</p>

<p class='pindent'>His action would have fulfilled his intention to a nicety,
if he had not neglected, for the second time that day, to
take into account the power of that east wind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little ball of paper was caught midway, whirled
in an ellipse, and neatly and accurately—with what
might have seemed demonic intent—deposited in the
centre of the squire’s stomach! Mr. Urquhart secured this
unintended missile as it rolled down between his legs,
and laid it with a careless gesture upon the table in front
of him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf made a dash forward, but stopped abruptly; and
very deliberately the squire unfolded the cheque and
smoothed it out before him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s just silly, me boy,” he remarked calmly. “No
need to insult a person, when you’ve picked him out
of the ditch! That’s just rude and uncivil. That’s unkind.
There you are!” And with a gesture as grandiose
and princely as if he were returning a rapier to a disarmed
antagonist, he raised his arm and stretched out
the thing for Wolf to take back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Without a word Wolf submitted—received the slip of
paper from that outstretched hand and replaced it in the
identical pocket where it had lain since morning.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he did so, he was conscious of two dominant feelings,
a sensation of sickening shame, as if he had been
caught stealing a piece of silver from the communion-plate,
and a puerile thrill of delight to think of Gerda’s
pleasure over the carpet, the clock, and the new spoons!</p>

<p class='pindent'>As this event occurred, the countenance of Jason Otter
relaxed into a thousand wrinkles. Up went his hand
to his mouth, to hide a chuckle worthy of Mukalog himself.
But the only comment he uttered was a murmured
“Boss-eye!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a preparatory-school expression that
had not entered Wolf’s ears since his childhood in Ramsgard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“May I ask you to close that window again, Otter?”
said Mr. Urquhart in his silkiest tone, removing, as he
did so, with the tip of his finger, a drop of wine that had
trickled down from the outside of the decanter upon the
cover of the manuscript.</p>

<p class='pindent'>While Jason was fumbling with the window, Wolf had
begun a series of preoccupied pacings, up and down,
across and back, over the expanse of the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When the window was closed he stopped and spoke.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Monk tells me that Mr. Round is in the kitchen and
has brought a fish to show you—a large perch—caught
out of season. Do you mind if I run in and see it before
I go? I’m afraid I must be off now. I’m glad you’re
pleased with the look of our book, Sir! And I thank you
for this money. It was ridiculous of me to——” He broke
off. “I shall change it at Stuckey’s on Monday. It’ll keep
the pot boiling splendidly, Sir.” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The time that passed between his utterance of that final
word “splendidly” and the entrance of all three of them
into Mr. Urquhart’s kitchen did not present itself to him
in the form of the passing of so many minutes. It presented
itself as one shattering question, addressed by
Wolf Solent <span class='it'>to</span> Wolf Solent, as to whether this crowning
defeat over the cheque had really done at last the thing
he dreaded! Would he find, when he took up his life
again, that his “mythology” was stone-dead .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. dead
as Jimmy Redfern?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Beautiful in their blue-black intensity, the great dark
stripes over the metallic scales of the perch—caught out
of season—brought back to Wolf’s mind a certain inland
pool, near Weymouth backwater, where he had once
hooked a small specimen of this particular fish, which his
father had made him throw back again. As it had swum
away through the aqueous dimness, between two great
branching pickerel-weed stalks, he had had an ecstasy
in thinking of that lovely, translucent under-world, completely
different from his, in which, however, the pale-blooded
inhabitants knew every hill and hollow, just as
intimately—nor with such very different associations
either—as he knew his own world.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Spacious and noble was the kitchen at Barton Manor;
but somehow, as Wolf took that fish into his hands and
entered into the overpowering emanation of its dead identity—its
pale blood-drops, its sticky iridescent scales, its
mud-pungent smell—he was seized with a sudden shock
of intense craving for that barren, brackish country
around Weymouth where his “mythology” had first been
revealed to him. “Which of us five men,” he thought, “is
most like a fish? It’s the best symbol of the Unutterable
that there is!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Laying the fish down, while Mr. Round explained to
the squire and Jason how his niece had caught the
poacher—and it turned out, as the innkeeper went on,
that this poacher was none other than Lobbie Torp, who
had been over there soon after dawn—Wolf stood aside,
conversing with Miss Elizabeth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I congratulate you on your uncle’s recovery,” he
said. “I often felt so sorry for you after that day we
met at the pond.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The “automatic young lady” wetted her lips with the
tip of a little snake-like tongue and whispered something
almost inaudibly. Wolf drew back further with her till
they were out of hearing of the rest.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t know why I should tell you this, Mr. Solent,”
she said, with an air of sentimental hesitation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m afraid I didn’t hear,” he replied rather coldly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t often tell strangers anything,” she went on.
“But seeing your lady’s brother, at <span class='it'>that</span> time in the morning,
and finding him with this fish and everything, put
it in my head to tell you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and then I heard you
were here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I am sure I’m much obliged to you, Miss Round,” he
said, with a lack of curiosity that verged on impoliteness.
“It’s .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very kind of you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. remember
me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But as he lifted his fingers to brush away a fly from
his face, Miss Round, Mr. Urquhart, Jason, Monk—all
receded and faded before him, till they became small,
insignificant, wavering shadows! The smell of the dead
fish, as he caught it from his raised hand, touched that
spacious kitchen and turned it into thin air. In its place
there appeared the hot, powdery sands by the King’s
statue at Weymouth, the tethered donkeys, the goat-carriages,
the peaked bathing-machines. In its place appeared
the grass-green seaweed clinging to the black
posts of half-obliterated breakwaters. In its place appeared
the bow-window of the drawing-room in Brunswick
Terrace, where, in those early mornings, as he
watched his grandmother’s maid shake the duster over
the sill, there always hung a peculiar odour of sun-dried
woodwork, mingled with the salt of the open sea!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your wife’s father was there, Sir,” was what he heard
now, with at least a quarter of his mind. “But he had
been drinking and was all so mazed-like that he couldn’t
hear what uncle and Monk were saying. But <span class='it'>I</span> heard
them, though they didn’t know I heard them. And oh,
Mr. Solent, they’re all after you; they’re all watching
you like dogs at a rabbit-hole! They’re just pushing you
on to it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and that’s God’s truth!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had been whispering all this with flushed cheeks
and an intense gaze fixed upon him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s attention began to return.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Pushing me on to what?” he replied, in equally low
tones.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I were born in Barton,” the girl whispered. “I know
every stick and stone of the place; but I didn’t know
’twere as bad as I learned it that day.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do you mean?” he murmured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They said,” she continued rapidly, “that every Urquhart
what’s lived at House since Noll Cromwell’s reign
has drove some young man into Lenty Pond! They said
’twere only the Reverend Valley’s league with Jesus
what made young Redfern die in’s bed, stead of drowning
hisself! They said for certain <span class='it'>sure</span> you’d be the one
to go next. All the aged folk in village do be watching for
it, they said—them as is wise in what was and must be!
They said ’twere a good day for King’s Barton when
you came here, foreign as you be! Uncle said there were
Scripture for it. He first knew there were Scripture for
it, he said, when Mr. Valley drove his voices away from
his poor ears and he stopped worrying. ‘Some <span class='it'>must</span> go
that way,’ he said, ‘while pond be pond. And if it ain’t
I, ’twill be he,’ he said. I knew who ’twere they were
talking of by their fleering nods.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl paused. Wolf noticed that her eyes had grown
liquid and soft. A feeling of undeniable discomfort rose
up within him. “What a superstitious idiot I am!” he
thought. “The automatic young lady has taken a fancy
to me, that’s all it is! This is her way of starting an intimacy.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, Miss Round,” he said gravely, “I think
it’s very nice of you to be so concerned about me. But
you can set your mind at rest. All villages have these
legends. Besides .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. who knows? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I may be such a
crafty scapegoat that I’ll bear the burden without turning
a hair!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She opened her mouth; she opened her blue eyes
wide; she distended her little round nostrils.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go back where you came from, Mr. Solent dear!” she
whispered. “Go back to London afore anyone can push
you to it! I shivered in my breasts, for fear for ’ee, when
I saw how bitter cold that pond were in the horns of
dawn! ’Tweren’t only the sight of Lobbie Torp fishing
against the law what made me shake. I’ve thought of you
and dreamed of you, Mr. Solent, yes I have; and I’m
not ashamed of it, ever since I first set eyes on you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf glanced nervously across the kitchen; but what
he heard and saw reassured him. His singular interview
with Miss Bess seemed totally disregarded by the others.
Jason was evidently propitiating Roger Monk with
the most fawning civility; while the Squire and the innkeeper
were occupied in weighing the perch.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was impressed more than he could have foreseen
by the girl’s manner; nor had he missed that poetical
expression of hers—“the horns of dawn.” He began a
humble and equivocal answer to her startling outburst,
trying to explain to her the subtle manner in which these
wild rumours, drawing their sap from the human passion
for the supernatural, gathered weight in the countryside.
He was a little dismayed, however, by the reckless response
in his own fingers, which seemed to be reciprocating
the ardent pressure of hers, as he bade her good-bye!
Had he lost <span class='it'>all</span> integrity of emotion, he asked himself, as
he went across to take leave of the others? Had his retention
of that cheque undermined the whole dignity and
self-control of his nature? Or was it that what he had
accidentally discovered as to the Lesbianism of this
strange girl appealed to something perverse in his imagination?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once out of the house, however—once clear of the
bare raked-over flower-beds, beds whose patches of yellow
crocuses and jonquil-buds seemed shrinking back
into the earth under that biting wind—he threw those
feelings from him and took the shortest way to the Blacksod
road! This led him past the churchyard and the
vicarage-gate; and he scarcely knew whether his jarred
nerves sympathized more vibrantly with the frost-bitten
population under the grass, or with the obsessed little
priest drinking his brandy amid all the trash in that
desolate study!</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he got clear of the village, he struck westward
across the fields, so as to hit the upper road; and it was
not till he reached Babylon Hill that he paused to take
breath. There he decided to skirt the edge of Poll’s Camp
and avoid the more familiar descent into the town.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You two down there,” the demon within him began
muttering, as his glance swept over Blacksod, from Preston
Lane to the Malakite shop, “you two down there
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. when are you going to stop rending me and tearing
my vitals?” This was not the first time lately that he
caught himself coupling Gerda and Christie together.
“These Bess Rounds,” he thought, “are a lot easier to
manage than <span class='it'>my two</span>!” Repeating the syllables “my two”
with all the more bitter relish because of his realization
of their outrageousness, Wolf began descending the westerly
slope of Poll’s Camp, with the intention of discovering
some unorthodox way of striking Preston Lane without
having to walk the whole length of the High Street.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he reached level ground he found he had to
cross several enclosed orchards, which he did by scrambling
through three successive hedges. Pricked by thorns,
stung by nettles, his hands smelling of the bitter sap of
elder-twigs, he made his way through those ancient enclosures,
noting how their lichen-covered branches reproduced
almost exactly the colour of the grey sky. In
spite of the bitter wind, he stopped in the middle of
one of those orchards to crouch down over a patch of
shining celandines. The valiant lustre of those starry
petals in the dark-green grass gave him a confused hope.
No scent had they in themselves; but, as he pressed his
forehead into the cold roots of the grass around them, the
smell of the earth, sucked up through mouth and nostrils,
entered into the very nerves of his soul with a long, shivering,
restorative poignance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is it dead?” he said to himself. “Well, even if it <span class='it'>is</span>,
I’ve still got <span class='it'>some</span> sensations left!” When he thought in
this way about his “mythology,” it was queer how he
always endowed it with a visible shape. He thought of it
as “it,” and this “it” was always compelled to take the
shape of large, succulent leaves, the leaves of a water-plant
whose roots were hidden beneath fathoms of greenish-coloured
water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>Some</span> sensations left, even if it <span class='it'>is</span> dead!” And he rose
heavily to his feet and moved on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He emerged into a narrow, unused cart-track between
overgrown, neglected hedges. As he made his way down
this path, treading on young nettles and upon old burdocks,
he couldn’t help thinking how charged with a
secret life of its own, different from all other places, a
deserted lane like this was. “What a world it is in itself,”
he muttered, “any little overgrown path!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The curious satisfaction which this secluded cart-track
gave him caused him to stand still in the middle of the
path. The hedges sheltered him from the wind. The
spirit of the earth called out to him from the green shoots
beneath his feet. Faint bird-notes kept sounding from unseen
places. The cold sky prevented them from completing
their songs; but the stoicism of life in those feathered
hearts refused to be silenced.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His consciousness, as he stood there, seemed to stretch
out to all the reborn life in the whole countryside. “Good
<span class='it'>is</span> stronger than Evil,” he thought, “if you take it on its
simplest terms and set yourself to forget the horror! It’s
mad to refuse to be happy because there’s a poison in
the world that bites into every nerve. After all, it’s short
enough! I know very well that Chance could set me
screaming like a wounded baboon—every jot of philosophy
gone! Well, until that happens, I must endure what
I have to endure.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind returned again to the scene about him.
“What a world it is, a little overgrown path, especially in
the spring, when it isn’t choked up!” He tried to imagine
what such a place must be to the rabbits, field-mice,
hedgehogs, slow-worms, who doubtless inhabited it. “Very
much what Lenty Pond is to its frogs and minnows!” he
thought. And then his mind, from visualizing those remote
backwater-worlds, turned once more to Redfern.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m Redfern Number Two,” he thought. “There’s no
getting over <span class='it'>that</span>.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The path he followed soon emerged into the back-premises
of a small dairy-barton; and these in their turn
opened out into one of the outlying streets of the town.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Redfern must have been an idiot,” he thought, as
he made his way towards Preston Lane, “to contemplate
drowning himself over Urquhart’s manias. King’s Barton
isn’t everything. King’s Barton isn’t a shut-off world,
like that deserted path!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked at his watch as he approached the door of
his house. Just five o’clock! “Will she have got rid of
him? Will she be away and the place empty? She knew
I was coming back to tea. It will be the first time she’s
ever done it, if she is away.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he fumbled with the latch of the gate, he found that
once more he was associating Gerda and Christie together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There were four purple crocuses and two yellow ones
in the flower-bed on his left; and on his right, three impoverished
hyacinth-buds, of a pinkish colour; and they
all seemed to be doing their best to sink back into the
earth out of a world that contained, among its possibilities,
such a thing as this wind!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is Bob Weevil in there with her?” he thought, staring
at the crocuses till they ceased to be crocuses. “He
may not be .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but one thing is absolutely certain, and
that is that Christie and the old man are having tea together!
If not now, they will be, soon. What more natural?
‘The dear father would with his daughter speak.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He did his best to peer into the parlour-window, but
the afternoon was so dark that all he could make out
was a faint glow from the firelight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked at the closed door and made a step towards
it; but a leaden weight seemed to oppress the muscles
of his arm. He glanced down now at those wretched
hyacinth-buds. How miserable they looked! The strange
thing was that he had the feeling now that to open <span class='it'>this</span>
door would be opening the <span class='it'>other</span> door too!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stood hesitating, listening to the wind whistling
along the rain-gutter upon the roof above him. At last,
with a violent effort of his will, he lurched forward,
opened the door with a jerk, and walked into the house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The kitchen-door was open, and from the middle of
the hallway he could see the kettle steaming upon the
stove. The parlour-door, however, was shut. He hung up
his coat and hat, and with a beating heart he opened the
parlour-door. There, by a low red fire, with the tea-tray
between them on the little card-table, sat Gerda and
Bob Weevil, drinking their tea.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was conscious, as he entered, of an atmospheric
density in the room—a density that seemed both material
and psychic.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The place smells of Bob Weevil’s new clothes,” he
thought, moving forward towards them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The young tradesman rose to greet him, but Gerda
retained her seat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You were so late that I thought I wouldn’t keep Bob
waiting for his tea,” she said; “but I’ve got your cup
here, and it’s only just made.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Bob was good enough to give me lunch,” he remarked;
“so you are right to treat him nicely. Sit down,
Bob.” And pulling a third chair towards the table for
himself, he held out his cup for Gerda to fill.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well,” he said, after he had tasted his tea, “I found
Urquhart at home, and I met Jason there too .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. oh,
and a friend of yours, too, Bob! Guess who that was!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he spoke, he tried to catch Gerda’s eye, but she
successfully evaded the attempt.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t mix with any such swells,” remarked Weevil,
with a facetious grimace. “I’ll try another piece of that
cake, Mrs. Solent, if you don’t mind.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The emphasis he laid on the words “Mrs. Solent” was
jeering and impudent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It was Bess Round,” Wolf brought out grimly; “and
the joke of it is she’d come with a great perch that she’d
found our Lobbie catching out of season.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda flashed a glance at him that even in that dim
light was like the blade of a knife.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Bess is no friend of mine,” said Weevil. “She caught
that fish herself, I’ve no doubt, and palmed it off on Lob.
Lob don’t need to go as far as Barton for his fish .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
season or no season .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. does he, Gerdie?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>I</span> don’t know, and none of us here know either,” the
girl rapped out. “Lob does what he likes these days when
he’s out of school. He’s got to fish early, if he’s to fish
at all.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>What came suddenly into Wolf’s head at that moment
was an excited wondering why it was that a fish had once
been a symbol for Christ. This thought, however, vanished
as quickly as it arrived; and he soon found himself
trying in vain to exchange an intimate look with Gerda.
More and more strongly, as he sat there sipping his
one bitter cup of tea—he had no spirit to ask for a
second, no spirit to ask for more hot water—was the conviction
growing upon him that something really serious
had happened. Gerda had a look on her face utterly different
from any he had ever seen there. It was a hard,
reckless, unhappy look, resolute, reserved, indrawn. She
looked five years older than when he had seen her asleep
in her bed that morning.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He furtively felt in his pocket, to make sure that the
cheque was there still. He had an uneasy feeling, after
all those agitating occurrences, that he might have lost
it. He longed for the moment of Weevil’s departure, that
he might throw it into her lap!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What did you think of my poor old Dad, Mr. Solent?”
enquired the visitor, munching his cake with relish.
Wolf was conscious of a ridiculously insistent
wonder as to when it was that Gerda had run over to
Pimpernel’s for this luxury. “He’s not much to look at
when he’s at meals, or to hear from either,” went on this
pious offspring; “but he takes notice after supper. Last
night, for instance, if you’ll excuse my mentioning it,
he began jawing away like a dissenting minister about
my having no purpose in life. What’s <span class='it'>your</span> purpose in
life, Gerdie?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t talk nonsense, Bob,” replied the girl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s <span class='it'>yours</span>, Mr. Solent?” pursued the incorrigible
young man, while Gerda was bending over the lamp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had by this time become so certain that something
fatal <span class='it'>had</span> happened, that in his nervousness it was
very hard to restrain himself from a violent outburst.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Purpose?” he repeated; and the word sounded pure
nonsense. “She must have given herself to him,” he
thought, “out of blind anger, just to spite me! If it isn’t
that, what is it? Something’s happened. She’s either given
herself to him or promised to!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Purpose?” he repeated aloud, turning the word over
in his mind as if it were a stone or a shell. “I suppose,
to get at reality through experience? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. No! How
shall I put it? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. To enjoy reality through sensation?
I expect that’s it. Through certain kinds of sensation.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The illuminated lamp threw its light upon Gerda’s
face as she resumed her seat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What would you describe as your purpose, Bob?”
he went on, thinking to himself: “She’s gone through
something that’s startled and shocked her .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or she’s
made up her mind to go through it. She’s not the same
Gerda that I left this morning with her face drenched
with crying.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Bob Weevil rose to his feet. “My purpose is to get
home to supper,” he said. “I told Dad last night that it
was to serve my God, and he told me not to be so cheeky
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so you see he’s not such a fool after all, the funny
old chap!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda displayed no emotion of any kind on Weevil’s
departure. As soon as the door was shut upon him, Wolf
produced Mr. Urquhart’s cheque and pressed it into her
fingers. “You shall have your clock and your carpet and
your spoons; and everything else, honey,” he whispered,
clutching her by the wrist.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were back in the parlour now, and she smoothed
out the crumpled piece of paper upon the tea-tray. Then
she folded it up, as mechanically as if it had been a
napkin, and handed it back to him, looking at his fingers,
but not at his face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you want to wash up these things for me, Wolf?”
she remarked coldly to him over her shoulder, as she
took up the tray and carried it into the kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As she passed him again in a couple of seconds, moving
with a candle in her hand, he made a tentative caressing
gesture. “Don’t, Wolf!” she murmured, pushing
his hand away. “I’m tired. I’m going to bed.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He followed her to the foot of the staircase and looked
up at her as she walked upstairs. “You’ll be able to get
all those things now, Gerda!” he cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her face, as she held the candle level with her breast
and turned to look at him, was white and set. For the
first time that evening she stared straight into his eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s too late now,” she said quietly, and passed on into
their bedroom.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap22'>THE QUICK OR THE DEAD?</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda was asleep, or pretending to be asleep,
when Wolf got into bed beside her that night on February
the twenty-fifth. He was physically so exhausted
with walking and so drowned by exposure to the wind,
that he soon sank into oblivion himself; and all night the
two lay side by side, their heads, their hips, their knees
frequently touching, but their souls restlessly wandering
far apart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The first feeling he had when he awoke was a faint
impression of moss and earth-mould. Then he realized
that the sky between the curtains was of a deep blue.
He had opened the window wide before getting into bed;
and the room was full of a delicious relaxed air that
must have blown over leagues of Somersetshire pastures.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s impossible,” he thought, “that I shouldn’t be able
to deal with everything, when Nature can produce mornings
like this!” He propped himself up on his arm and
gazed down upon the figure by his side, struck once
again, as he always was, by the freshness of her beauty.
She stirred in her sleep and turned her head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Her profile is flawless,” he thought. “How do these
classic faces come to exist in these parts at all?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He bent down over the sleeping girl as tenderly as he
might have done over the first cuckoo-flower of the season.
“It’s happened at last,” he said to himself. “She’s
let him have her .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just to revenge herself about the
cheque and about everything else she endures in her life
with me! I’m a cuckold at last. I’ve always wondered
what it would feel like; and now I know. I don’t feel
anything! I’m just a mirror for <span class='it'>her</span> feelings. It’s been
so bad for her that it’s of <span class='it'>her</span> I think .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. entirely .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
absolutely!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl stirred again, more uneasily than before.
There came a frown between her eyebrows, and her nostrils
quivered. She turned her head from side to side,
like a person in a fever or a person whose limbs and
arms are paralyzed. Deep in Wolf’s heart, as he stared
at her, there gathered a fundamental decision. Formless
at first, it rolled together in the recesses of his nature
like a rack of clouds on a misty horizon. Then suddenly
it tossed forth a coherent resolution. “I won’t let the
water-rat keep her. Cuckold or no cuckold, I love her.
She’s been miserable about it. I won’t give her up!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At that moment, disturbed by the magnetism of his
look, Gerda opened her eyes. He bent and kissed her;
and as he lifted his head again, he saw a lovely smile
flicker across her face. “She’d forgotten the whole
thing!” he thought, as he watched this smile vanish away
and the same rigid, unhappy look come back. She made
a movement to extricate her arm from the bedclothes,
but the look upon her face was sufficient. He scrambled
to his knees and slipped out of bed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The day being Sunday, there was no need for them
to have their breakfast as early as this; but the bright
sunshine and the warm, spring-scented air made the hour
seem later than it really was.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All that morning they were both like persons on the
deck of a becalmed ship, who move restlessly, hurriedly,
through familiar tasks, in preparation for some drastic
event. Over and over again Wolf was on the point of
launching forth into a passionate declaration that what
had occurred made no difference .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that he loved her
just the same .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that he blamed himself over the matter
of the cheque. But every time he formulated such
words and was on the verge of expressing them, that
look of hers froze them in the utterance. She held
him helpless and mute by that look. It was like a
ceremonial death-cloth wrapped round a living head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When the housework was quite done—and he noticed
that she did it much more conscientiously than usual, as
though making excuses to prolong it—she announced
her intention of going over to Chequers Street. “If Lobbie
hasn’t gone out yet,” she said, “and I’m pretty sure he
won’t have, I’ll get him to go down by the river with
me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll be back for lunch, won’t you, honey?” He
threw into these words all the supplication he could.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, Wolf, I don’t think so,” she replied slowly. “I
think I’ll get mother to make up some sandwiches, like
she used to in the old days, when Lob and I went down
to the Lunt. I’ll be back for tea, though. You can put on
the kettle at five, if I’ve not come then. I won’t be much
later than that.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s memory rushed away to that March evening by
the banks of the river .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to the shed in the middle
of the wet grass .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to the yellow bracken. It struck
his mind as ominous, if not tragic, that at this juncture
she should instinctively revert to Lobbie and the Lunt.
But he made no attempt to dissuade her. “She thinks it’s
pride in me that I don’t,” he said to himself. “It isn’t
that! It’s respect for her. It’s respect for her life. It’s
respect for her identity.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where will you get <span class='it'>your</span> dinner?” she said at last,
standing between the crocuses and the pink hyacinths,
while Wolf still held their front-door open. His heart
leaped up at this word. Was it an overture, a motion
towards him?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I expect I’ll find enough in the cupboard, sweetheart,”
he said lightly; but into these words also he threw
a caressing supplication. “If not, I’ll see if my mother’s
in .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or Christie,” he added.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At the sound of Christie’s name she did fumble for a
second with her gloved fingers upon the top of the iron
gate, while her head sank down in intense thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wait a minute, Gerda!” he cried, noting this hesitation.
He ran back into the hall and returned with his
hat and stick. “I’ll come with you as far as their house.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She made no objection to this; and as he shut the
gate behind them, the particular feel of the ironwork and
the noise of the latch brought back to his mind some
occasion in the past when they had embraced each other,
just there, in a rush of happy reconciliation. He glanced
at the pigsty across the road. There wasn’t a hint upon
the air today of anything but the spring.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gerda,” he said, when they were well past the street-corner,
a vantage-ground that served the idlers of their
quarter in lieu of a tavern-bar, “I don’t want you to
think I’m a bit jealous of poor old Bob. It’s only fair
you should have a friend you’re fond of, in the sort of
way I’m fond of Christie.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was silent for a couple of seconds; and his words
seemed to make the lines between the paving-stones, as
he stared at the ground, turn into the rungs of a ladder
upon which it was necessary to place his feet very carefully,
because the space between gaped and yawned.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then she said slowly: “There .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. would .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. have
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. been .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a time .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. for telling me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that,
Wolf. Better say no more about it today.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He held his peace after that, and they reached the
monument-maker’s house just as the “five-minutes” bell
of the parish-church began to ring, indicating that it was
service-time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The warmth of the day was phenomenal. A light, vaporous
mist, balmy and fragrant, as though millions of
primrose-buds had opened beneath it and millions of
jonquils had poured their sweetness into it, hung over the
lintels of the houses and floated in and out of the doorways.
Filmy white clouds, so feathery that they faded
into the air at their outer edges, swept northwards over
the roofs of the town; while the liquid blue of the sky,
visible in fluctuating pools and estuaries between those
fleecy vapours, seemed to obliterate everything that was
hard and opaque from the whole terrestrial globe. So
flowing and so diffused was the heaven above, that it
seemed to spill and brim over, making the pavements
underfoot appear like clouds too, and the patches of
grass in that or this little garden like interstices of another,
a second sky, whose receding depths were green
instead of blue!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Groups of church-goers were moving languidly past
the gate of the Torp yard under the urge of their various
pious purposes; and in his growing distress at the set,
indrawn look on his girl’s face, Wolf felt mocked and
taunted by the somnolent leisureliness of those people’s
voices and by the fresh neatness of their clothes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not another interchange of real feeling could he obtain
with her until they knocked at her father’s door;
and it was a sharp stab to him to think that this was actually
the first time since their marriage that they had
presented themselves together at this threshold.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lobbie himself opened the door to them, and they
found the whole family collected in the front-room. Mrs.
Torp, having obviously finished making the beds and
tidying up the kitchen, for she wore a dirty apron over
her Sunday dress, had recently dropped into a chair
opposite her husband, from which island of peace she
had clearly been flinging abroad volleys of belligerent
eloquence; for the plump shirt-sleeved monument-maker
had a fixed expression upon his face, at once crushed
and protesting—an expression that remained visible even
after the stir of their arrival.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve only come in for a moment,” said Wolf, taking
Mrs. Torp’s vacated chair, as the lady led her daughter
away to pour her troubles into a feminine ear; “but I
think Gerda intends to stay. Well, Lobbie, you certainly
caught a big fish yesterday! I must congratulate you.
Season or no season, it’s the biggest perch I’ve ever
seen!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My old woman have been skinnin’ the poor lad like
a fish ’isself, just as you were coming in,” said Mr. Torp.
“She says I encourage he in they scallywag larks. I don’t
encourage yer, do I, Lob Torp?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The boy glanced uneasily at the kitchen-door, from
behind which his mother’s voice was still audible.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She were out for mischief, Mister,” he whispered
solemnly, “else she would never have meddled wi’ I!
What did she reckon she wanted, walking in they wet
fields afore ’twas light? And she spoke to I twice afore
I hooked thik girt fish. Be I’d been little, like I were
wunst, she’d have made I run home quaking and shaking!
Do ’ee know what she said to I, Mister? Her came
’long o’ thik hedge-side path what leads from Farmer’s
Rest to Pond Lane. I saw she coming and I wished
myself anywhere; for I reckoned the wold chap had gone
and hid ’isself; and her were after he; both on ’em
nigh crazy, as you might say! Her came walking straight
to where I were, stepping silent, like any wold cow, and
when she’d looked at that cold water awhile her kind o’
shook. ‘Have ’ee seen it?’ she said. ‘Seen what, Miss
Bess?’ I said. ‘The face under the water,’ said she, ‘what
they all talk of up at Rest.’ ‘I bain’t looking for no faces,’
said I. ‘I be fishing for perch.’ ‘ ’Twill be seen,’ she said,
‘ ’Twill be seen, till one that be living now be where <span class='it'>it</span>
be .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. then ’twill fade out.’ It were when she were
saying ‘fade out,’ just like that, that I saw me float
bob down. You can believe, Mister, that a fellow had
no time then for a woman’s foolishness! But ’twere
naught to she what my float were doing. ‘ ’Twas thik
face in this here water,’ said she, ‘what worrited uncle.
Thik face will be seen by all and sundry,’ said she, ‘till
the time come when——’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lobbie’s discourse was interrupted by a sudden movement
by his father. Mr. Torp got up from his chair. “You
stop that now!” he roared. “You stop that or I’ll call
you mother to ’ee! Sunday be Sunday, I say, and Mr.
Solent be our visitor. If Providence have on’s mind to
afflict such a gentleman, ’tis his wone concern! This house
be my house, Lob Torp; and this morning be Sunday
morning. So shut thy mouth about faces in ponds!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>So loud was the voice of Mr. Torp, that no sooner
had he resumed his seat than his wife and Gerda burst in.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s this about Sunday, John?” said the lady
sharply. “Can’t you leave that boy in peace for a moment
when my back’s turned? If it <span class='it'>be</span> Sunday, what of
it? Here’s our Gerdie asking for nice meat-sandwiches
for to take the lad picnicking. Mr. Solent says he can’t
stay, so me and you can do what I was telling ’ee just
now .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. go quiet and natural to Nevilton meeting.
What do ’ee think I went to the trouble of putting my
best dress on for? To hot up yesterday’s Yorkshire pudding?
If some can eat cold meat, <span class='it'>others</span> can eat cold
meat. There’ll never be, all Spring I tell ’ee, such a day
for me and you to cover them quiet miles.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Torp permitted himself a swift, humorous leer
at his preoccupied son-in-law.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What <span class='it'>is</span> Nevilton meeting, Mrs. Torp?” enquired
Wolf, with forced vivacity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tis Mother’s favourite preacher,” interposed Lobbie.
“Old Farmer Beard, Mr. Manley’s friend, fetches he
in dog-cart, from Ilchester. ’A be a Baptist, mister, the
kind that washes grown folk all over like babies. Mother
goes to hear he, because ’a says all drinking-men, like
our Dad, will be burnt cruel, come Judgement. Mother
likes for Dad to hear they things; but Dad be a churchman,
same as I be, what don’t hold with such conclusions.
Dad and me be High-Church. Mother be Evangelic.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Torp untied her apron and began folding it up.
It was clear from her expression that wrath at her offspring’s
impudence was qualified by pride in his capacity
for fine theological distinctions. She began a rambling
eulogy upon the preacher from Ilchester, punctuated by
irritable exclamations, as she hunted in vain about the
room for some tract or hymn-book connected with this
celebrity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf had no attention just then for anybody but
Gerda, whose abstracted look of settled misery, as she
sat upright upon a straight-backed chair against the wall,
pierced him to the heart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s given herself to that little ass,” he thought,
“out of pure spite; and it’s broken up all her self-respect.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Torp’s project of making Mr. Torp walk five
miles that afternoon to hear himself damned became a
desolate background now—like that marble table in the
Weevil villa—to this wretched crisis in his life. The idea
of some stuffy little room in Nevilton—a village he particularly
admired—resounding to the voice of this protégé
of Mr. Beard, on a day like this, seemed to paint
the whole Dorset landscape with a mud-coloured pigment.
A bitter, masculine anger stirred within him at the
destructive emotionalism of these women, unable, as they
always were, to “leave well alone.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And it did not lessen his agitation to think of Gerda’s
blind, desperate instinct to take refuge with Lobbie, her
old childish companion, down there in those Lunt meadows!
Just exactly a year ago since the three of them had
come home through the spring twilight .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and now
she was to carry her sandwiches to the very spot, eat them
with Lob on the trunk of that very tree, set eyes, perhaps,
on that very shed, and nothing to persuade her to
let him join them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A pitiful craving came upon him to take her in his
arms and purge her bedevilled memory of every trace
of that lecherous water-rat. And Christie too—why must
Christie, in some crazy psychic mood, go and stir up the
villainous fires of that old man’s smouldering lust? The
words that he had read in that fatal exercise-book wrote
themselves on the Torp wall as he stared at it. If he
hadn’t made love to her and then drawn back in the way
he did, she’d be still just as she used to be, immune as
the flowers on her mantelpiece to that old satyr’s approaches.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda’s abstraction had by this time become so extreme,
her face so sad, that he couldn’t bear it any longer.
He walked across to her; and in a low, emphatic voice,
under cover of Mrs. Torp’s voluble hunt for her lost
pamphlet, he begged for leave to accompany them on
their excursion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s too late, Wolf!” she repeated, looking at him
with eyes that seemed five years older than they’d been
yesterday. “Haven’t I told you it is? Why do you keep
teasing me so?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He bent down above her now and lowered his voice
to a whisper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It <span class='it'>isn’t</span> too late, Gerda. You’re taking everything much
too hard! I love you far too much for anything to be
too late!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the tenderness in his voice only seemed to irritate
her. She flashed a look at him of aversion, of contempt.
“You are a fool, Wolf,” she whispered. “I never supposed
you were quite such a fool!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then she jumped to her feet. “Come on, Mother!
Never mind those Nevilton hymns. Lobbie and I want
to start in a minute. Come, both of you, and let’s make
the sandwiches!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her mother and brother followed her into the kitchen,
and Wolf was left alone with Mr. Torp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Cold meat for me dinner, and hot damnation for me
pudding, seems so!” remarked that good man. “Well, if
I’ve got to walk to Nevilton this afternoon, I shall traipsy
round to ostler Jim’s this morning. He’ll be finished
cleaning up in Peewits back-yard by now; and him and
me can sit snug for a while .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ‘doors all locked and
maids all mum,’ as the saying is.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Even while he was still speaking, Mr. Torp was shuffling
into his Sunday coat and straightening his Sunday
tie. Wolf picked up his hat and stick.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I’ll be moving on too, I think.” He spoke louder
than was necessary, in order to let Gerda know he was
going. But there was no voice or sign from the kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-bye, Mr. Torp,” he said, shaking his father-in-law’s
hand warmly. “Be careful of that ostler’s backroom,
or your preacher will catch you on the hop.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t ’ee worry, Mr. Solent,” returned the other;
“and do ’ee bear in mind thee own self what I told ’ee
yesterday. Not a man of us, these shifty times, nor a
gentleman neither, can see what bides for’n. ’Tisn’t as
’twere when I were young. Life be a wink of the eyelid,
these times; and only them as jumps the ditches goes dry
to bed!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once back again in the sun-warmed quietness of Chequers
Street, Wolf, after walking a step or two, paused to
take counsel with himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’ll be back for tea,” he thought, “and then I’ll
talk to her. I’ll make her take this affair lightly. But no
more of Weevil. She must be quit of Weevil. Cuckold I
am. Wittold I refuse to be!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He drew pensive patterns on the sunlit pavement with
the end of his stick. All manner of contradictory projects
floated through his brain as to how to spend the long,
tantalizing hours between this and five o’clock. Of these
notions one lodged itself finally in his mind as the very
thing indicated by the occasion. He would consult the
most cynical of all his oracles! How many months was
it since he had last been over there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. since he had
gazed straight down through the clay to where the skull
grinned back at him? Too long .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. too long! Yes, that
is what he would do. He would visit “old Truepenny.”
Nothing would make the hours pass quicker than that!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked at his watch. It was a quarter to twelve;
and he knew there was a Sunday train to Ramsgard at
twelve-fifteen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll have hours for walking back .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hours and
hours,” he said to himself. “I’ll come by the highroad.
I’d like to find a way through the Gwent Lanes, if there
be time.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then suddenly an idea came into his head that brought
a rush of blood and a faint, pricking sensation to the
flesh that covered his cheek-bones. Why not run in to
Christie’s for a second, and see if she’d go with him?
Damn!—but there might be somebody he knew on the
platform or in the train. They’d probably—just because
it was such a heavenly day—find Miss Gault at the cemetery!</p>

<p class='pindent'>No, it was too risky. “But I’ll run in a second, anyway,”
he thought, “and see what she says.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A few minutes later he found himself ringing the bell
at the Malakite side-door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All was silent in the little alley. He could see some
brilliant patches of green, swimming in pools of sunlight,
in the small garden. Then a faint shuffling of feet
came along the pavement, outside in the road. That shuffling
and the beating of his heart were the only sounds.
All Blacksod lay immersed in a golden mist of quiet.
He rang the bell again. “In a minute,” he thought, “I
shall hear her coming down! The old man may sleep
late o’ Sundays; but she’ll be up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The shuffling steps in the road came to a pause.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mister!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned towards the voice. It was a little, old-fashioned
maid carrying a prayer-book.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If it’s the Malakites you want, mister, I saw them
pass my house, down-street, an hour a-gone. They were
dressed for travel; so it did look to me! I reckon they
were minded to catch the eleven-three to Weymouth.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf left the door and advanced to meet the speaker.
He knew her now as one of the shop-girls in Pimpernel’s.
He had often bought cakes of her for Gerda. She was reputed
to be a Roman Catholic.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dressed for an excursion, eh, miss?” he said lightly.
“That eleven-three goes straight through to Weymouth,
doesn’t it? Well, they certainly have a lovely day!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The little Catholic walked hurriedly on. “She’ll miss
her great miracle if she’s not quick,” he thought. “Don’t
they say the words exactly at noon?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>All the way to the station he tried to concentrate his
mind on the mystery of the Mass. “The Christ of these
priests,” he thought, “is a totally different god from the
Jesus of Mr. Beard’s preacher. Which of ’em would help
me most at this juncture, ha? Which of them?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was only when he was sitting alone in a third-class
smoking-carriage, staring out of the window at Melbury
Bub, that the full bitterness of this last piece of news
grew ripe for tasting.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She ought to have known I’d look in today,” he
thought. “She ought to have known it.” And then he
thought: “Natural enough to go to Weymouth on a sunshiny
March day! Mr. Malakite .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and his daughter
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. at Weymouth. I expect they’ll lie down on those
dry sands where the donkeys are. They’ll probably have
lunch at the ‘Dorothy’ and then go for a row, or cross
over the ferry to the Nothe and walk to Sandsfoot Castle.
Perhaps they’ll go past Brunswick Terrace and walk
across Lodmore.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Oh, it was all natural enough! If only he hadn’t come
across that exercise-book. But an imaginative girl like
Christie might exaggerate a thousand little nothings. Besides,
“Slate” was a story. It wasn’t a diary. It revealed
nothing .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. nothing at all .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. except her
thoughts!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda too.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. He hadn’t seen anything. He hadn’t
caught them at anything .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. except sitting in the dark.
What if <span class='it'>that</span> also were a fancy of his own? He leaned
forward and clasped his hands over his knees. Oh, this
was the worst state of all! Not to be quite sure. The train
was passing close to King’s Barton now. There was the
great perpendicular tower .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. there was the churchyard!
He unclasped his hands and sat sideways against
the window, trying to make out Redfern’s headstone;
but the train moved too fast. He thought he caught a
glimpse of it, but he wasn’t sure. He wasn’t sure of anything!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hardly anyone else got out when he reached Ramsgard.
“If I meet Miss Gault,” he thought, “I shall be rude
to her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He skirted the Public Gardens and hurried past the
Lovelace. “Is that old waiter there still?” he wondered.
At the sight of the workhouse, the personality of his
father seemed to beckon him, to welcome him; but it
was still only as a skull. The skull knew he was coming,
though; and it was glad! The skull of old “Truepenny”
was the only brain in the world whose thoughts he <span class='it'>could</span>
read! Eyeless sockets deceived no one.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was passing the slaughter-house now. “I’ve only
touched meat once,” he thought, “since she talked to me
that day. But if I see her at his grave I shall sheer off
and not go near it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he came to the hole in the fence that led to
that portion of the cemetery where the paupers were
buried, he recalled how startled he’d been when he saw
Miss Gault go down on her hands and knees to get
through this aperture. So well did he remember that incident
as he himself now went down on his hands and
knees, that while a clump of dock-weeds struck cold
against his face, he became suddenly certain that Miss
Gault was there now.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Yes! If she wasn’t there, her spirit was most certainly
there. He scrambled to his feet, feeling sure that he
would see her; and there she was! She was seated upon a
grave over against William Solent’s. On her lap was a
paper of sandwiches, in her hands a book. She was
munching and reading at the same time, her hat on the
grave by her side, her large black boots emerging from
beneath a voluminous skirt, whose stiff folds suggested
the “Melancholia” of Albert Dürer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had vowed he would bolt if he saw her that day,
but instead of that he pulled off his cloth-cap with
effusive humility and stepped over the intervening
mounds.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Miss Gault!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She must have marked him down while he was under
the fence, and been merely gathering her wits; for all
she did now was to raise her eyes and blink at him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“So you’ve come at last, boy!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved up to her, laid his hand upon one of hers,
as it still clutched the paper of sandwiches, and sat
down.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Everyone seems eating sandwiches today,” he threw
out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Best thing to do, boy,” she replied; “best thing to
do! They’re lettuce.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What a day it is, isn’t it, Miss Gault?” he murmured
vaguely, glancing at the words “William Solent,” upon
which the sun was pouring its friendliest benediction.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She peered obliquely into his face. “What’s the matter
with you, boy?” she said earnestly; and then, with a
nervous apology in her tone, “It’s Emma’s day out; so
I thought I might as well have a picnic.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I’m all right, Miss Gault! Tired of school, perhaps.
But we’ve all got to feel the pinch somewhere.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Take off your cap, Wolf, and let me look at you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He threw his cap down on the grass and accepted a
sandwich which she held out to him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why, you’ve got grey hairs!” she cried. “You hadn’t
one when you came to me a year ago.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Dorset air,” he remarked grimly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And you’ve got lines there; and your mouth is different;
and you’re a lot thinner!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hard work!” he threw out. “I’ve done Urquhart’s
book for him though .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and I’ve been paid for it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She turned round fully towards him now and laid
both book and sandwiches on the ground. He noted that
the volume was Palgrave’s “Golden Treasury.” He also
noted an empty medicine-bottle beside her, blurred with
the whiteness of milk, upon whose orifice three black flies
had settled.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re thoroughly unhappy, my dear,” said Miss
Gault. “I can see it in everything about you. What is
it, Wolf? It’s ridiculous not to confide in an ugly old
woman like me! What is it, Wolf?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A sound of bells came to them at that moment, carried
on a gust of soft air that was like dark, sweet rainwater.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The Abbey,” murmured Miss Gault. “They’re out of
church; but they always go on ringing those bells.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I like to hear them,” he responded; and then, with a
sigh: “I suppose it’s the same with everyone. Life doesn’t
get easier.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A kind of disintegrating softness had fallen upon him.
The vaporous sunshine, the dreamy light-blowing air,
the imponderable fragrance, seemed to combine to melt
some basic resistance in his bones. He felt as if there
were arising from that place of mortality a sweet, faint,
relaxing breath, full of the deliciousness of luxurious dissolution.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The distant bells suggested the greenish fluidity, flowing
and fluctuating, of the fan-tracery under the Abbey-roof.
They suggested the centuries of calm, irresponsible
repose that weighed on that royal coffin under the Abbey-floor!
What did it matter that a girl called Gerda had
abandoned her body to a youth called Weevil? What
did it matter that a lecherous old bookseller was giving
his daughter a day on Weymouth Beach?</p>

<p class='pindent'>So indifferent to all human fates did he feel just
then, that, after swallowing the last morsel of his sandwich
and wiping his fingers on the grass, he stretched
out his feet in front of him, brushed the flies away from
the empty bottle, and gave himself up to a physical sensation
of being an integral portion of this wide, somnolent
landscape!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I am Poll’s Camp,” he would have said, if the sensation
had articulated itself. “I am Lovelace Park. I am
the Gwent Lanes. I am Nevilton Hill. I am Melbury Bub.
I am Blackmore Vale and High Stoy. It is over me that
Gerda and Lob are now walking, down there by the
Lunt.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why don’t you tell me what’s the matter, boy?” repeated
Miss Gault. “Don’t you care anything about me?
Is my friendship of no value to you at all?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her words seemed as much a part of the balmy light-fluttering
air above him as his own body was a part of
the earth-mould below him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Feebly, with less energy than he had used to brush
away the flies from the bottle, he analyzed his inertia.
“I have killed my life-illusion,” he thought. “I am as
dead as William Solent. I’ve got no pride, no will, no
identity left.” He fixed his eyes on his father’s headstone,
across which there kept fluttering the shadow of an unbudded
branch from a little tree near the fence. He
tried to visualize the skull under that mound. It was
still of the skull, rather than of coffin or skeleton, that
he thought! But this also seemed to have lost its identity.
No cynical grin came back towards him from down
there. No sardonic commentary upon his predicament
rose to mock him or to reassure him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly he was aware that Miss Gault was speaking
rapidly, excitedly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But you needn’t tell me, boy. I keep my eyes and my
ears about me. I know where you’re always going! It’s
those Malakites have got hold of you. It’s that Malakite
girl that’s the trouble. You’re being unfaithful to that
wife of yours. I knew it would end like this. I knew
it was all a woeful mistake. These marriages out of one’s
class never do succeed and never will. The truth is, boy,
that you don’t know yourself, or what you really need,
any more than that stick of yours does! You’re making
yourself ill with remorse, when neither of those little
Blacksod hussies cares a fig about your feelings .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or
about your faithfulness either. Why, they’ve been brought
up to be as indiscriminate as flies! You don’t know our
Dorsetshire lower classes, boy. They haven’t the same
feelings, they’re not human in the same way as we are.
And what’s more, Wolf, let me tell you this”—her voice
deepened to a discordant harshness, and she seized the
“Golden Treasury” and beat it against the ground—“you’re
not really in love with either of them! If you
were, you’d choose between them. You’re one of those
men like Jason Otter, like Mr. Urquhart, who in their
hearts hate women. It was sheer madness your ever picking
up this Torp girl. If Ann hadn’t been such a feather-headed
fool she’d have stopped you! Ann is so full of
her own pranks, that you’re just a pet to her, a great
baby-pet! If Ann had been a different sort of person,
you’d never have got mixed up with these Malakites. I
told her myself what would come of it! I told her in my
own drawing-room, while Emma was spoiling the tea-cakes,
that day she called on me. I said to her, ‘If you
can’t keep your boy from that book-shop he’ll go the way
his father went!’ That’s what I said to her. I remember
it because I was unkind to Emma afterwards about the
tea-cakes! But Ann only laughed. That mother of yours
doesn’t any more know the difference between good and
evil than between——” The excited woman broke off
in a half-humorous chuckle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But before this diatribe had finished, Wolf had pulled
in his legs and straightened his back. Something deeper
in him than the grin of that skull down there, deeper
than the drowsy deliciousness of the day, twitched, contracted,
tightened. The ancient, unconscious tug of the
navel-string, or what bound his flesh to the flesh that
had conceived it, roused him from his torpor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He saw that hard, ruddy, ironic face. He saw that
gallant chin. He heard those light, reckless, defiant tones.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m with you, Mother!” he thought, while his lip
trembled. “I’m with you, whatever any of them say!
Good or evil, I’m with you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault paid no attention to this stiffening of the
figure at her side. Her thoughts too, it seemed, had wandered
to the roots of the past.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“William! William!” she groaned aloud. “I’d have
held you. I’d have peaked and pined to hold you. I’d
have slaved for you, watched for you, wasted for you,
and always forgiven you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Completely unaware of the effect of her words upon
her companion, she turned her great wild-horse eyes, the
whites of which showed desperate in the sunshine, from
Wolf to the grave and back again from the grave to Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I only pray, boy,” she went on, “that you’ll never
meet a woman who’ll love you as I loved him down
there. If you do, you’ll kill her with the Ann Haggard
in your brain. We’re all of us flinty enough, boy—base
and flinty; but I’ve never met a person who gloried in
it as your mother does! Oh, love him, boy! Love him,
love him, as I’ve loved him for twenty-five years!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf lurched to his feet and stood erect. The struggle
that had been going on so long within him between his
father and his mother had reached a crisis. He had come
here to range himself with that skull, to cry to it for a
sign in his trouble; but this woman’s desperation had
wrought a change in him. His mother’s words of yesterday
rose up in his mind. His father must have lodged
himself like an undying snake in Miss Gault’s bosom!
Would it be with his mother or with his father that he
would range himself now, were this accusing creature
with the pendulous lip and the vast black lap the very
Judgement of God? With which of them? With which
of them?</p>

<p class='pindent'>With his mother! Out of that hard, ironic flesh he had
been torn. Good or bad, he was on her side. Good or
bad, he would be judged with her!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve listened long enough,” he said sternly. “I came
to him alone. I came for my own reasons. I didn’t come
to side with you against her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault jumped up so impetuously that one of her
feet tripped upon the empty bottle. Her intention was
apparently to rush over the grave; but this misadventure
sent her stumbling towards it, her great body bent forward
and her arms outspread, till she fell on her knees
against it. Crouched and hunched there like an immense
black dog, she emitted a pitiful, hardly human groan.
Then she twisted her head round so that one of her
troubled eyes was just able to meet Wolf’s indignant
stare.</p>

<p class='pindent'>From the depths of this eye—as from a water-hole in
the crust of nature—a look shot at him that he never
forgot. But he moved forward until he faced her; and she
sank then into an easier position, yet still remained upon
her knees.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He had you always in his mind,” she gasped. “You’ve
never thought about <span class='it'>that</span>, have you? He was too proud
to say a word. Oh, he had a soul worth a dozen Anns!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The challenge of Miss Gault’s spirit, flung at him
through that wild-horse look, was a challenge from his
mother’s enemy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was then that anger overcame pity in Wolf’s heart.
“Do you understand,” he burst out, “I happen to care
a good deal for my mother? We’ve lived together more
closely than anyone knows. Do you understand? More
closely than anyone knows.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The crouching woman jerked out two long, dark-sleeved
arms.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Go back to her, then!” she screamed, waving her
hands as if she were driving off a jackal from a dead
body. “Take her back to London! Don’t let us see either
of your faces again!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Without a word or a gesture in response to this, Wolf
wearily picked up his stick from the grass and strode
over the graves to the gap in the fence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Back to London?” he muttered, as he went down on
all fours and butted his way through the opening. “That’s
what Jason said. They’ll get it lodged in my brain before
they’ve done! But I <span class='it'>won’t</span> go. ‘There’s a special
providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, ’tis
not to come; if it be not now, yet it will come; the readiness
is all.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once outside in the road, there came to him a troublesome
stab of remorse. He had always been so indulgent
to what Miss Gault had to say about his mother. Why
should he have turned on her like that just then?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was half tempted to drop down on his knees again
and crawl back. He stood still, listening attentively; but
there was not the faintest sound from in there. The living
woman was as quiet as the dead man. Ay! the
god of human sorrow is a man; but Love crucifies women.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Grasping his stick below the handle, he hardened his
heart and hurried off towards Ramsgard. When he
reached the workhouse, he looked at his watch. It was
only half-past two. He had two hours and a half before
tea-time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>On the side of the road opposite the workhouse was a
low stone wall. The garden of some tradesman’s house
was separated from the pavement by this wall, on the top
of which grew thick green moss. The Ramsgard people
being all at their noon-meal, he had the pavement to
himself; and he stopped and stared at this coping of
moss. Hooking his stick on his elbow, he laid both
hands upon the top of this wall; and the life of the moss
seemed to pass into his nerves. It was at this moment that
he heard a boy’s shrill scream from an unseen playground
behind the house which appertained to this garden.
The sound was not repeated; but Wolf clenched his
teeth. “It’s one of the Houses of the School. It’s a bully,”
he thought. And then he found himself muttering a
deadly curse. “You brute! you brute!—— Never, till
you die, shall you dare to do that again!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then it suddenly occurred to him that he had his back
to the workhouse.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wonder if my father could see this wall from the
room where he died? I expect he could.” He walked on
into the outskirts of the town. The lane which he followed
emerged into a narrow road, where the chilly,
newly-budded hedges alternated with small stone houses,
standing back from the thoroughfare and approached by
little stone paths. He caught sight of an old man, sitting
on a trim bench in one of those little gardens, with
a look of the most supreme contentment on his face as he
smoked his pipe and watched the passers-by. There was
a white cat at his feet and a clump of daffodils in the
flower-bed beside him; and bathed as he was in the mellow
afternoon light, his leathery, secretive, roguish countenance—he
might have been the owner of some little
shop or a retired gardener—seemed to gather to itself
the whole long history of Ramsgard and its famous
school, from the time when King Æthelwolf was buried
in the Abbey to the time Miss Gault’s father became headmaster!</p>

<p class='pindent'>This sly, sagacious, whimsical old man had nothing of
the taciturnity of a remote village about him; still less
had he the urbanity of a large town. He was as much a
product of certain peculiar local traditions—in this case
urbane gentility mingling with urbane obsequiousness—as
if he had been a rare beetle in the hazel-copses of High
Stoy or a specimen of the “Lulworth Skipper” butterfly
on the Dorsetshire coast!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf couldn’t resist a spasm of envy as he paused for
a second to peer up at this old rascal, sucking his pipe,
cogitating upon his savings in Stuckey’s Bank, leering at
the lads and lasses who passed his gate.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Free from
all remorse, all misgiving, how greatly did that old
villain enjoy life! Ay, he was as selfish as his cat—as
those yellow daffodils in that flower-bed! Before he left
him Wolf had a queer hallucination. He saw this perfectly
well-behaved old man in the shape of a plump,
blunt-nosed maggot, peering out from a snug little crack
in the woodwork of a blistering cross, on which hung,
all in her long black skirt the form of Selena Gault!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf walked on, but he couldn’t help pondering on
the kind of self-centredness that had enabled this old
demon to last so long. What would <span class='it'>he</span> have made of it
if, on some business-trip to London, he had encountered
that Waterloo-steps face? Just thought: “That fellow
ought to be in the workhouse. They oughtn’t to allow
such people here.” Or he would have simply regarded
him as part of the station, no more than a door, a post,
an iron ornamentation, an advertisement-board!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Very likely this old man was the headmaster’s gardener,
and had worked in his day for Miss Gault’s
father. Well, which had got the most out of life, Miss
Gault, hunched up over there in the pauper’s plot, or
this merry old man with his white cat?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Gault loved cats too. Some who loved cats had
to eat their sandwiches upon graves. This citizen of Ramsgard
had a different destiny.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf moved on up the road, passing an increasing
number of lively Sunday-afternoon strollers. What, he
wondered, were Gerda and Lobbie doing at that moment?
Where were Christie and the old man? He came to a halt
just then. Should he, after all, go to Ramsgard station
and take the train, instead of walking? No sooner had
this idea entered his head than he decided to follow it.
He would have plenty of time to change his mind again
if there were no train.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll go into the Abbey for a minute,” he thought. He
turned northward and entered the town by way of a field-path
past the massive wall of the Preparatory School.
When he got close to the Abbey, he encountered several
groups of straw-hatted boys, and the sight of them put
him in mind of Mr. Smith. What would <span class='it'>he</span> have felt
about the marriage of Lorna’s daughter? From the straw-hats
his mind slid to Mattie, like a loaded trunk down a
ship’s gangway. Would she make Darnley happy?
Would she be happy herself?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He caught sight of a pair of immaculately handsome
lads, arm in arm, each radiating delight in the touch of
his companion. He saw them reject with mechanical indifference
the appeal of a dilapidated tramp who had
evidently singled them out from the rest, hoping that the
happiness which surrounded them like an aura would
redound to his advantage.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was at this moment that he heard himself called
by name.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wolf! It <span class='it'>is</span> you! I saw you first!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He swung round, and there were Mattie and Olwen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he responded to the little girl’s excited embrace,
which was so emphatic that it attracted a glance of
haughty disapproval from one of the straw-hatted pair,
he had time to note that this was the second time today
that a person’s presence had communicated itself to him
before it appeared in the flesh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He made no bones about kissing his half-sister very
tenderly across Olwen’s woollen cap; and the two straw-hatted
ones drew away, evidently feeling that the emotions
of the populace were a discordant note in that privileged
place.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We walked over, Wolf,” the girl said. “That’ll do,
Olwen! Darnley wanted to have a walk with his mother.
Jason’s writing poetry in the back-garden. So I said I’d
show her the King’s tomb. She’s been learning about
King Æthelwolf—haven’t you, Olwen?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Olwen displayed scant interest in royal dust. “I
want to sit outside with Wolf,” she remarked, clutching
his fingers with an impatient hand. “I want to talk to
Wolf while you go back to church.” Mattie took not the
least notice of this remark, and they all three moved
slowly round the corner of the Abbey towards its front-entrance.
The bride’s eyes were brilliantly animated.
And Wolf felt as if a warm globe of magnetic power
were shooting out rays of exaltation from her strong, virginal
body. There was that in her excitement that at once
irritated Wolf and touched him to the heart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I was going to write to you, my dear,” she said
eagerly, “in case I shouldn’t see you before Saturday.
We’re going to Weymouth, Wolf!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked at her closely. The heavy, sulky face was
gleaming. He commented, with shame in his secret heart,
upon his lack of spontaneous sympathy. What did it
mean, this cold, tightening sensation within him? Was it
that the figure of Darnley, urbane, melancholy, unattached,
had become a sanctuary of refuge for him? He
found himself responding to the clutch of Olwen’s feverish
fingers with a significant and treacherous pressure.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m glad you’re going to Weymouth. What a splendid
idea!” he replied, as enthusiastically as he could.
“Weymouth has always been——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At that moment they reached the wide-open door of
the church.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You go in first, my dear,” he said, in a tone of command.
“I’ll just smoke a cigarette, on that seat, with
Olwen, and then we’ll come. Don’t sit too far in. But
we’ll find you. It won’t be crowded. Oh, we’ll easily
find you! But Olwen and I have a very important secret
we want to talk about.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He gave her a reassuring little push, half-playful,
half-paternal, and watched her figure vanish in the cool
dimness of the nave.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Olwen positively danced with glee as they moved
across to a vacant seat under a yew-tree, not far from
the grotesque little statue of the poet-courtier.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She thought we were going to talk about her <span class='it'>presents</span>,
didn’t she?” said the little girl, as they sat down and he
lit a cigarette. “But we’re not, are we, Wolf?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Perhaps <span class='it'>I</span> am,” he replied with a smile. “But how do
you like all this marrying, Olwen?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The child’s eyes were fixed upon the hazy outline of
“The Slopes,” just visible in that shimmery air beyond
the Public Gardens and the railway. “Oh, don’t talk
about it, Wolf! Jason and I never talk about it. Jason
says the only nice part of it will be the wine. They’re going
to have Sauterne.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf began to realize that Mattie’s nature was not one
that a love-affair expands and widens. It dawned upon
him that this little Malakite waif was being thrown more
and more upon the indulgence of Jason.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The child’s mood this afternoon was evidently wistful.
She seemed to take Wolf’s sympathy for granted; and
now, with her hand in his, after uttering the word
“Sauterne,” she relapsed into silence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He too was silent, repeating to himself an imaginary
dialogue with Gerda, over their tea in the kitchen. The
disagreeable thought came into his head, “Shall I feel
any difference when I lie by her side tonight?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wolf!” The little girl’s voice had a solemn intensity,
and she stared at him with grave eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Say on, Princess Olwen.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you think people are always treated as they treat
<span class='it'>other</span> people?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The child’s question, directed against the very heart of
the universe, disturbed Wolf profoundly. It was the sort
of remark that indicates something materially wrong in
the person who utters it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t say I do, Olwen. Life is far more unjust than
ever King Æthelwolf was.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You like Miss Malakite very much, don’t you, Wolf?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He gave a palpable start and flung away his cigarette.
What <span class='it'>was</span> coming now? This warm spring air seemed
to be bringing all human troubles to the surface as the
hot day brings forth the adders!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Very much indeed, Olwen. Christie is very nice indeed.
She’s rather—she’s rather like you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I want to see her, Wolf. I want to tell her that I’m
<span class='it'>sorry</span> I wouldn’t ever speak to her when I was a little
girl.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What made you so unkind, Olwen?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shall I tell you, Wolf? You won’t tell anyone, will
you, if I tell you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He shook his head with all the solemnity he could
muster.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t look at me while I tell you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“All right. I’m not looking.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Grand-dad Smith told me when I was very little”—the
voice in which the child said this was low and restrained,
and her words came slowly—“that .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Miss
Malakite .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. was .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. leper.” Having overcome
the difficulty of her confession, her expression became
entirely different. She seemed as relieved to have
brought this thing into the light as if she’d pulled a thorn
from her hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But, Olwen darling”—Wolf spoke with as much intensity
as if he were addressing an intelligence equal to
his own—“your grandfather didn’t mean a <span class='it'>real</span> leper!
He meant that people shunned Christie because of her
father .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. because of her father’s bad character.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The child’s eyes opened wide. “Then Miss Malakite is
not a leper at all? Not all white and horrid under her
clothes?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Of course not! She’s sweet and lovely under her
clothes .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just as you are!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The child looked away again towards “The Slopes,”
her forehead puckered in concentrated thought. Then she
turned to him with flushed cheeks. “Oh, Wolf, I want to
see her! I want to see her soon .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. today .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. tomorrow!
I want to tell her how glad I am she isn’t a
leper!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was Wolf’s turn now to look at “The Slopes” with
a pondering frown.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suppose he <span class='it'>did</span> take Olwen to see Christie? What harm
could come of that? He rose from the bench. “Come on,
sweetheart,” he cried, “Mattie will wonder where we
are!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They met Mattie coming out of the church; and at that
same moment the tramp he had observed talking to the
two boys drew near. Where had he seen this fellow before?
The tramp approached them, and began begging.
Good Lord! It was that old, courteous waiter at the
Lovelace! Mattie was now pulling Olwen away. “No,
no!” she murmured in reply to the man’s supplication.
But Wolf fumbled in his pocket. He could tell by the
feel of the coins that he had half-a-crown and a few halfpence
there. That was all he had. At that moment the
great clock in the tower above their heads began striking.
It must be four o’clock! He must hurry to the station.
Like a flash he thought, “If I give him the half-crown
I shan’t be able to buy a ticket!” He put the few
halfpence into the man’s hand. As he did so he noticed
that very scar which had struck his attention a year ago.
The ex-waiter’s eyes met his own, but without recognition.
“It must be drink,” Wolf said to himself, as he hurried
away after the two girls.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Half-an-hour later and he was safely ensconced in a
crowded carriage, from the windows of which he could
see only the blue sky.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I <span class='it'>might</span> have given him that half-a-crown,” he
thought. “I could have done it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The incident taunted and teased his mind so unmercifully
that it was not till he had left the train and was
nearly at his own door that he could harden his heart
against it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s just pure chance that I’m not in the same boat as
that waiter,” he thought. “He’s got a look .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it’s a
different expression, but he’s got a look of that Waterloo-steps
man!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rushed into the house, calling Gerda’s name in a
low, eager voice. There was no answer. He went into the
parlour, the kitchen, the back-yard. He ran upstairs and
looked into the bedroom. No one! The familiar furniture
wore that peculiar air of desolation that of all things
he especially disliked. The beauty of the day seemed to
have completely passed it by. It looked cold and unhappy.
It looked like a child that has been left indoors
when all the world has been out at a festival.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And yet he had to admit there was something dignified,
even <span class='it'>spiritual</span>, about those quaint, cheap objects, waiting
there for their absent mistress. “They are the extreme
opposite,” he thought, “of that self-satisfied old rascal
with the white cat.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He busied himself with careful preparations for tea,
and grew peevishly puzzled at the unexpected difficulties
he encountered. “Girls do things so mechanically,” he
said to himself, as for the tenth time he walked round
their kitchen-table, altering this and that. When all was
ready he opened the dresser-drawer, took the cheque
from beneath Mukalog, and placed it under Gerda’s
plate.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he sat down on a hard, high chair and waited,
listening to the clock in the parlour. He felt too excited
even to smoke a cigarette.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What <span class='it'>is</span> it that worries me?” he thought. “Not fear
lest she has some crazy love for the fellow. I know very
well she hasn’t. Damn! I suppose Carfax wouldn’t believe
it if I said I was thinking simply and solely about
<span class='it'>her</span> feelings. But there it is! You can’t sleep with a girl
for twelve months and not feel what she feels! I don’t
believe his having gone to the limit will change her at
all for me. I don’t want to set eyes on the chap again
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but that’s another thing. How sleek he looked in
that new brown suit! I suppose he hung that brown coat
over the bottom of our bed. That’s not a very nice
thought!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly the idea came to him that perhaps she would
never come back—that he would have to eat this meal
alone, and all other meals! He hurriedly looked round
for something belonging to her wherewith to reassure
himself. He saw no sign anywhere of a small work-basket
that she was in the habit of using for her occasional
young-girl struggles with needle and thread.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Restlessly he got up and began looking about for this.
The little work-box became the most important of all
objects in the world at that moment. If it were here, why,
she would soon be safely home again! Where the devil
was it? He went into the parlour. He even went upstairs.
Not a sign! “But I’ve seen the thing .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I know I’ve
seen it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. since I came in!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>With a sudden inspiration he opened the dresser-drawer.
There it was .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and protruding from its edge
a ragged glove! He left the drawer open, went to the
front-door, and looked out. The light was waning. At
the first approach of twilight that lovely day began yielding
itself to its death with a precipitate eagerness!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stood in the doorway listening. Ah, <span class='it'>there</span> was the
sound of her footsteps coming along the pavement! No.
It was the slouching form of their neighbour, the owner
of the pigsty. Silence again! Then again footsteps! No.
This time it was a pair of lovers, returning from their
Sunday stroll, the boy’s arm round the girl’s waist.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt unwilling to close the door, and he went back
to the kitchen, leaving it wide open.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was with Lobbie anyway. Surely she would never
do anything wild or rash with Lobbie at her side!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Such light wind as there had been during the afternoon
had dropped completely now. How still everything
was! He and the furniture sat waiting, while this perfect
day sank willingly into oblivion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gerda, my precious! Gerda, my darling!” He kept
forming words of this kind in his mind, as he fidgeted
on his hard chair, facing the hallway. “It was all my
fault, Gerda, that you gave yourself to your water-rat!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He began to long for her coming, as he had never
before longed for any human step. He seemed to realize
the helpless pathos of her beauty as he had never realized
it before. He saw her bending naked over the stove, as
he had seen her once, when, for wantonness, he had undressed
her downstairs. He saw the calves of her legs, the
curves of her thighs. He saw the peculiar loveliness of the
back of her neck and the way her eyelid drooped upon
her cheek, giving her profile such evasive innocence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You <span class='it'>must</span> come, Gerda! I don’t care for anything,
except for you to come! If you come in now .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. safe
and sound .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you can sulk and scold and cry as much
as you like!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>How late it was getting. The clock would be striking
six soon! She had never been as late as this before.
Something <span class='it'>must</span> have happened! He got up from
his chair and looked round the kitchen. Mukalog lay on
his back in the open drawer; and suddenly the sight of
the idol’s fleering face transported him with fury. The
“god of rain” seemed the epitome of everything that was
making him suffer. Jason’s contempt, Gerda’s absence—they
were both gloated over in that little monster’s
abysmal leer!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Recklessly he seized the idol, as he might have seized
a dead rat, rushed with it out of the kitchen, out of the
house, across the road, and flung it with all the force of
his arm high over the pigsty into the darkening field beyond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The pigs, aroused by his approach, set up a hideous
hullabaloo; and the foul smell of their enclosure followed
the indrawn panting of his breath. He paused for
a minute, with his hands on the fence of the shed, uttering
a foolish malediction upon the screeching snouts
raised towards him. Then he turned with a groan and
shuffled back across the road.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Standing disconsolately by the table, he mechanically
lifted up Gerda’s plate and surveyed the cheque beneath
it. He recalled how she had folded it up with cold,
indifferent fingers. He pressed it with his clenched knuckles
and re-covered it. Could he do nothing to make her
come now, this very moment? “My ‘mythology’!” he
thought. Up went his hands to his eyes; and pressing
his eyeballs lightly, so as to blot out everything, he concentrated
his whole nature in one terrific effort to summon
up that formidable magnetic mystery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His will, thus strained to its uttermost, gave him a
sensation as if an obstinate, taut rope were tugging at a
water-logged bucket. Not a stir, not a vibration, in those
dark interior gulfs!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Removing his hands from his face, he swayed a little
against the table, dizzy with his mental struggle. It was
no use. His “mythology” would never help him again.
That ecstasy, that escape from reality was gone. Dorsetshire
had done for it!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He subsided into the same chair and waited, his hands
outspread, palms-down, upon his knees, his heels together,
his head bowed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A kind of waking-trance took possession of him, in
which he had the illusion that the smell of the pigsty
and Gerda’s absence were the same thing. “I shall have
to go to the Torps’ and ask about her,” he said to himself;
but the words only tapped against one another in
his brain like dry peas in a sieve.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he heard the gate click.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He rushed to the door, out of the house, and, heedless
of everything but overwhelming relief, hugged her to his
heart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her mouth was cold. Her cheek was cold. He pulled
her into the hall and slammed the door with a jerk of
his shoulder; but not for a second did he let go his tight
hold of her. His relief was so great that, as he pressed
her against him, he gave vent to several long-drawn
breaths that had in them the catch of sobs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had felt from the very first touch that she would
not resist him, that the barrier between them was broken.
When at last he got her into the kitchen and she had
taken off her things, he was hit to the heart by the haggardness
of her face. Till now she herself had been tearless.
Emotions must have done their worst with her all
that day, and she had nothing left. But the sight of the
carefully-laid tea-table stirred up too many old associations.
She stood staring at him, her hands hanging down
limply by her sides, her grey eyes fixed upon him. Then,
without the least contortion of her face, a torrent of
tears descended.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was after eight o’clock when they got up from their
tea-table. Neither of them had said a word about Bob;
but Wolf felt convinced that the girl, without using one
single articulate syllable about the matter, indicated that
henceforth she would close her door to Mr. Weevil.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was with a strange sensation that he found his
thoughts reverting to Christie and her trip to Weymouth—a
strange and peculiar sensation. He felt as if Christie
had grown thin and frail as a ghost—remote and far-off,
too—like that day when he saw her crouched in the
Castle lane! She seemed to have become once more what
she was in the beginning of their friendship .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a disembodied
entity, dwelling in his consciousness like a
spirit in a cloud, immaterial, unreal .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. near to him
as his own thought and yet far removed in body.</p>

<p class='pindent'>One by one, holding a blue-bordered napkin in his
hands, he dried each cup, each saucer, each plate, each
knife, each spoon, as Gerda handed them to him out of
the wash-pan in the sink. Sometimes in light, sometimes
in shadow, as his own figure came between her and the
two candles on the table, her face still showed fluctuating
signs of uneasiness. But these signs grew fewer and
fewer as he told her about Miss Gault and her sandwiches,
about the waiter at the Lovelace having become
a beggar, about the extreme emptiness of the outgoing
train and its crowded state returning, about the crafty
old man with a white cat—he suppressed all mention of
Mattie and Olwen—until at last an expression came into
her face that he knew well, an expression of sleepy, infantile
amusement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He paused in his narration directly he caught sight
of that look, and hung up the blue-bordered drying-cloth
in its place and proceeded to wash his own hands at the
tap.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He got into bed that night some while before she did;
and he lay quietly watching her, while she brushed her
hair at their chest of drawers between the two half-open
windows. This little wooden-framed looking-glass, on this
clumsy pine-wood object, had been Gerda’s only toilet-table
from the start. “She shall have more of these
things,” he thought, “when we’ve cashed that cheque!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he watched her candle-flame bend towards her in
the faint airs that came wandering out of the night into
the room—as he watched the careful gesture with which
she pushed back the candlestick as she stood there in her
long-sleeved night-gown—he pondered upon the death
of his “mythology.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Perhaps it was an escape from reality,” he thought,
“that I was <span class='it'>bound</span> to lose, if reality got hold of me! Dorsetshire,
at any rate, seems to have got hold of me. No,
no, I am <span class='it'>not</span> going back to London; and I am <span class='it'>not</span> going
to drown myself in Lenty Pond!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Gerda had finished brushing her hair and had
tied it with a thin blue ribbon—he had long since remarked
that this was one of the few personal peculiarities
she never deviated from—she seemed inclined to
loiter awhile before coming to bed. She closed the window
at the top, opened it at the bottom, and, drawing a
chair close to the sill, sat down there, leaning one of her
arms on the woodwork.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was odd how one single gross image annoyed his
mind to the exclusion of all others. This was the image
of Weevil in his brown suit, with most of the buttons
tightly buttoned, making love to her in that white, high-throated
night-gown! Of course, it couldn’t have been
in the night-gown .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but still he must have .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and
his brown suit had so many hard, impudent, shiny, cock-crowing
buttons!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t catch cold, sweetheart!” he cried suddenly,
while a very disconcerting doubt shot through him. Was
it revolting to her feminine life-illusion to slip into his
arms, easily, naturally, after the shock of what she had
undergone? Did <span class='it'>she</span> feel Bob Weevil’s brown suit, his
impudent buttons, too nearly, too closely, to bear the
thought of any love-making that night? He longed to
call out to her bluntly and directly. “Come on, you sweet
little fool, I won’t touch you!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or better still perhaps,
“Come on, you beautiful distracted creature, I’ll
soon make you forget your water-rat!” Instead of uttering
a sound, however, what he really did was to jump
out of bed, snatch his own warm dressing-gown from the
door, and wrap it about her shoulders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was very anxious not to bother her with either his
sensuality or his sentimentality. His feeling for her at
that moment was objective, almost impersonal. He returned
to bed, lit a cigarette, propped himself up upon
both pillows, and smoked meditatively.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Christie must be safe back now,” he thought; and
there moved slowly across his innermost consciousness
the evil suggestion that it was because of what he had
read in that exercise-book that the girl’s thin frame
seemed to him so unearthly tonight, her shadowy personality
so remote. “She’s lodged in my mind, though,
come what may,” he said to himself. “I <span class='it'>will</span> take Olwen
to see her,” he thought. “She <span class='it'>shall</span> find out she’s not a
leper!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>From Christie his mind rushed away to that little
house in Saint Aldhelm’s Street. “I suppose Emma’s
come home by now and Miss Gault’s in bed! I wish I’d
gone back and kissed her, huddled up like that on his
grave—kissed her right on her deformed lip!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The night-air was stirring again now, and the flame of
the candle upon the chest of drawers flickered up and
down, throwing queer shadows about the room. The air
was sweet with vague earth-odours—not the least tincture
of the pigsty perceptible—and as it blew in upon him,
past the motionless figure by the window, it seemed like
a host of air-spirits journeying on some errand that had
no connection with human affairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly he drew in his breath with a startled, hissing
sound, and sat bolt-upright, staring at Gerda in rapt attention.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl had fallen upon her knees at the window, and
was making little, tentative, whistling sounds. She was
trying to catch the notes of her blackbird-song! First one
note she would try, and then another; and each one, as
she tried it, broke off in mid-air, ineffectual and futile.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Her fingers were clutching the window-sill now, and
her head was tossed back. The gown he had thrown over
her had fallen away. Her shoulders looked cold and
pitiful. Her body trembled and swayed. Her back being
turned to him, he could not see that desperately pursed-up
whistling mouth; but most vividly he imagined it,
and imagined too the piteous contortion of that face
against the warm, green-growing darkness outside.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Gerda .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. my darling!” This was what he wanted
to cry out; but he did not dare to utter a whisper. The
room had become enchanted. It was a dedicated place—set
apart .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and there was he, foolishly propped up
on their two pillows, mute, helpless, like a witness at the
birth of a still-born child!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Again and again did the girl make desperate, discordant,
whistling sounds; but it was all to no purpose!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t mind, my darling!” murmured Wolf, when, in
a troubled pause after these attempts, he noticed her back
shaken by weeping. “Come on to bed, honey—to bed, to
bed! You’re lucky not to have started a hoot-owl answering
you. I fancied I heard one of those demons,
when I woke up in the middle of the night last night.
Come on, Gerda; there’s a good girl!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had never heard a human sigh so deeply drawn
as the one he heard now from that open window. But
she got up slowly upon her feet and blew out the
candle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He threw back the bedclothes and smoothed out the
pillow for her head. Tightly he held her when she
stretched herself out by his side.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, there it is!” he thought. “Life has scotched her
just as it has me. Urquhart’s cheque has brought me
down. Weevil’s brown suit has done the same for her.
Well, we must get on somehow. Shall I say good-night
to her before I let myself go to sleep? No; better not!
Better just hold tight to her .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and drift on in our
barge—down, down the stream .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. drift on in our
barge!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap23'>LENTY POND</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t you ever say ‘it’s too late’ again, Missy!”
were his parting words, as he kissed Gerda, a few days
later, across their iron gate.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was Thursday now, only two days before the King’s
Barton wedding, and events had moved rapidly since
that agitating Sunday. He had cajoled his Pond Cottage
friends into allowing Olwen to pay a surreptitious visit
to what after all was her paternal home; and the child
had fallen in love with Christie to such an extent that the
visit had been repeated within forty-eight hours. And this
very day Darnley was driving her in, as he came to
School, with the idea that she should stay a couple of
days under the Malakite roof.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No one will interfere; it’s all blown over,” Wolf
had said. “It would have to be some enemy if any fuss
were made. But there won’t be any fuss. A little gossip,
when Christie goes out with her in the street .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. nothing
more .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and perhaps not even that!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The only opposition to these proceedings came from
Jason, who, though he would not confess himself jealous
of this new passion in the child, brought forward
the darkest suggestions as to the dangerousness of Blacksod
as a place for little girls. “These large towns,” he
had said to them all, speaking as if Blacksod were a
second Birmingham, “these large towns are full of disgusting
goings-on. These tradesmen think of nothing but
their merry little ways. And, of course, if you want
Olwen to have her meals with Mr. Malakite——” But
to Wolf’s delighted surprise he had received emphatic
support in this enterprise from Mrs. Otter. He had, indeed,
been quite as astonished at the insight displayed
by that timid lady as by her defiance of the protests
of her eldest son. “Olwen will only do them good, Jason,”
she had said. “There’s a special providence over a
child like that. She’ll turn that sad little Christie into a
different girl.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was just after eight o’clock when Wolf swung round
to wave a final farewell to Gerda. He had begged her to
let him have a very early breakfast that morning; for
Mrs. Solent wanted him to see her tea-shop with what she
called “clear decks.” Everything had always been in confusion,
near closing-time, when he came in at the end
of the day; but this morning, full of pride that her son
should see her shop before her waitresses appeared, Mrs.
Solent had unlocked and cleaned up the place herself at
an incredibly early hour, and was waiting for him there
now.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The new tea-shop was not far from the Grammar
School, but it was in a side-street that branched off towards
the meadows where the Lunt encircled the town.
The town, in fact, melted into the country here even more
quickly than it did on the Babylon Hill side or in the
direction of Preston Lane. It was a more umbrageous
country, at any rate, into which that little side-street led.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Into this quarter of Blacksod, cutting its way through
heavy clay hills, diving between tall ferny banks covered
with beeches and Scotch firs, following swifter
streams than the Lunt, ran the great Exeter Highroad;
and it was the tourists from that direction that were now
to be waylaid and entertained.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This process had apparently already begun; for when
Wolf approached the neat little square building, lying
back from the road, with a garden in front of it yellow
with daffodils, his feeling was unmistakable that prosperity
was in the air. The wind was keen and invigorating
this morning, the sky clear; and as he strode up the
path between the swaying daffodils, he had a sharp, prophetic
sense of his mother’s future. He saw this little
shop moved to one of the main streets of the town. He
saw still more of the savings of that enamoured farmer
swept into the business! He saw his mother’s grasp upon
life growing more drastic, more daring, more debonair.
He saw her power over material things increasing, her
strange pride and exultant loneliness keeping pace with
her power. “She’ll leave me far behind,” he thought. And
there swept over him a wave of bitter shame at his own
incompetence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’ll be doling out bonuses to Gerda and me,” he
thought. “We shall be hanging on to her skirts! We shall
be a dead weight upon her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Vividly he recalled the discussion that had taken place
in the last few days between himself and Gerda on the
subject of how to spend Mr. Urquhart’s two hundred
pounds. How childish Gerda was, and how reckless he
was! The whole thing was ridiculous .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. with their tiny
income to think of spending all this on just smartening
up their house!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He knocked lightly now at the tea-shop door and entered
without waiting for a response. He was amazed at
the neatness and elegance of what he saw.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mother greeted him in the highest feather. Laughing
and jesting, she showed him the kitchen, the scullery,
the sanitary arrangements, the furniture. “The rooms are
empty upstairs,” she said; “but do you know what I’m
going to do? I’m going to leave Herbert-land, with its
dust and its smells, and move over here! I’m going to use
one of my waitresses—I’ve got two, you know—as a
maid. She and I will both sleep up there. There are three
rooms. And I’ll have a regular drawing-room. I’ll have
the kind of drawing-room I’ve always wanted—different
altogether from that old place in town.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mother and son were now seated on two immaculate
wicker-chairs. Wolf had not yet dared to light a cigarette;
but Mrs. Solent, with a quick, radiant gesture,
offered him one of her own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You won’t get enough exercise, mother, if you live
where you work; and your precious drawing-room will
always be full of the smell of cooking.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, we won’t think of that!” she cried, making a
stroke in the air with her cigarette as if condemning to
annihilation every trick of hostile chance; and as he
watched her, he realized for the first time what a power
she had of forcing external events into line with her
wishes. Never had he seen her so full of zest for labour
and trouble and tension as she was that morning. Wolf
himself felt sick with dismay when he thought of this
place filled with tourists from Exeter, and the rooms upstairs
reeking of culinary odours!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What are you making that face about?” his mother
asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Am I making a face? I was wondering how much
spirit you’ll have left for those evening walks you’re so
fond of.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Solent laughed gaily. “I had one, last night,” she
said, “towards Pendomer. There are lovely fields over
there”—she nodded her head towards the west—“and
delicious woods. I couldn’t want anything nicer. I went
out there last night .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. up the hill and over the hill
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I half-thought of waylaying you at the Grammar
School and taking you with me. But you know what I
am! I love my Wolf.” Here she extinguished her cigarette
and rose from her seat. “But I <span class='it'>have</span> to be alone for
these walks. I tell myself stories; I let myself be as romantic
and excited as I can. That time of twilight stirs
me up .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. like a nightjar, I suppose .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and I have
lovely sensations!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She moved past him; and as she passed she bent down,
took his head between her two hands, and kissed it. Then
she went to the door, and, flinging it wide open, inhaled
the cool, strong northeast wind. As she stood thus, with
her straight, sturdy back turned to him, he seemed to get
a supernatural glimpse of the whole power of her personality.
This tea-shop and that hill “towards Pendomer”
were only little, material symbols of a Napoleonic campaign
that she was working out .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. not necessarily in
<span class='it'>this</span> world at all, but in <span class='it'>some</span> world, some level of psychic
conflict, parallel with his “mythology.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I’ve got to be off, Mother!” he cried. And as
he extinguished his cigarette by the edge of hers, in one
of her new ash-trays, he instinctively squeezed it into an
identical perpendicular position. Then, jumping up from
the creaking wicker-chair, “I’m late as it is,” he murmured.
“I suppose Mr. ‘Willum’s Mill’ comes here for
his tea every day?” He strode to the door and stood there
by her side. Mrs. Solent laughed, with the rich, careless,
high-pitched laugh of a Ninon or a Thais.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Only on market-days, my son. But I’m going to tea
with <span class='it'>him</span>, next Sunday.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf disregarded this confession altogether. “I say,
Mother! You’re coming to the wedding on Saturday,
aren’t you? The day after tomorrow. You haven’t forgotten
that?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She turned towards him her radiant cheeks and glowing
eyes. “Will the monster be there, to see Lorna’s child
married to your respectable friend? If she’s there, I
<span class='it'>must</span> come. What sport it’ll be! The monster and I in the
same pew, and your sister landing her patient fish!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Across Wolf’s mind flitted the image of that unwieldy
figure stumbling over the milk-bottle at the grave.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I haven’t the least idea whether Miss Gault means to
come,” he said. “But <span class='it'>you</span> must come, Mother! You must
leave your work to your two girls. I’ll call for you at
Mrs. Herbert’s .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. about half-past nine .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and we’ll
walk over. Well, I must run. Good-bye, Mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She met his embrace with a swift, almost greedy kiss,
but immediately afterwards whispered with airy mockery:
“Mattie Smith must be very grateful to you for giving
her her darling! That pointed beard would never
have been caught if my Wolf hadn’t played matchmaker.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What the devil are you talking about, Mother? They
knew each other years before <span class='it'>we</span> came down here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There shone in her brown eyes such a well-spring of
satirical mischief, he found it hard to tear himself away.
A spasm of vicious sympathy with this dark-spurting jet
of malice produced the sensation within him of a nervous
twinge that was half a tickling delight to him and half
an adder’s bite.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind reverted in a lightning-flash to his father’s
skull. Oh, how gentle, oh, how kindly that grin of death
seemed, compared with this inhuman glee in the presence
of perverse fate! A malign voluptuousness rose up within
him, like an intoxicating bubble out of the very abyss,
spilling black bile through veins. Ferociously he offered
up that poor skull to this radiant sorceress. “You
look just as you did, Mother, when you teased Mr. Smith
so much, that Horse-Fair day. I hope <span class='it'>his</span> ghost won’t be
there on Saturday!” His words were innocent enough;
but he knew too well what passed, under their cover,
between himself and this woman. For good and evil
he had made his choice between the living and the
dead.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I <span class='it'>could</span> not feel like this,” he thought, “if I were the
Wolf Solent I used to be. Good-bye!” he repeated. “I
must run.” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All that morning, as he faced the Grammar School
boys, his mind squeezed out the essence of this scene with
his mother. He had gone over to her altogether! He had
deserted the “fellow i’ the cellarage.” He had betrayed
his “old Truepenny.” All that long morning, while those
boys’ faces scattered themselves into his mind like grey
ashes into a pail, he struggled to make clear what had
happened to him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had no longer any definite personality, no longer
any banked-up integral self. Submission to Urquhart had
killed more than self-respect. He could never have gone
over to his mother like this if his “mythology” had survived.
He could feel now that greedy kiss of hers upon
his lips! He had come to Dorset .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. he knew it well
enough now .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to escape from her, to mix with the
spirit of his father in his own land. But Fate was hunting
him “back to London,” and he began to have an
inkling as to what the alternative to London was. The
alternative to London was the bottom of Lenty Pond!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wilder and wilder grew his thoughts as he rounded
off the destiny of the House of Stuart to those furtive listeners.
Rows upon rows of dwarf-men .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that is how
he saw them now, these boys of his .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. embryo-men,
with a kind of distorted, atrophied intelligence, full of
a jeering, idiotic cunning! Oh, how he hated them and
the task of teaching them!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly in the very middle of his lesson he felt his
voice changing and becoming strangely vibrant. Good
God! What things were on the tip of his tongue to say
to them! Was he going to “dance his malice-dance” before
them, as he had danced it before that London audience?
Life upon this earth began to show itself to him
in a most evil light.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This killing of his “mythology,” how could he survive
it? His “mythology” had been his escape from life,
his escape into a world where machinery could not reach
him, his escape into a deep, green, lovely world, where
thoughts unfolded themselves like large, beautiful leaves,
growing out of fathoms of blue-green water!</p>

<p class='pindent'>What were his sensations to him now? What was the
air of a morning like this, without those mysterious
emanations from the glimmering depths?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had comforted Gerda; and the way she was happy
now in her childish delight over that two hundred ought
to have given a fresh glow to his days. But it didn’t. That
startling alliance between Christie and Olwen, which he
had plotted in the face of so many difficulties, and which
was apparently absorbing both of them in its excitement,
ought to have satisfied him. But it only made his
thoughts gloomier. The last time he had seen Christie, her
mind was so full of Olwen and Olwen’s future, that she
scarcely listened to what he was telling her!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Through the dizzy foreground of these boys’ heads,
white collars, sharp elbows, and scratching pens, through
the patient “notes” he himself was dictating to them,
floated in long procession all the people of his life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Urquhart was sending his book in instalments to Bristol
to be printed. He appeared to be thinking of nothing
else. Jason was revising another volume of poetry, which
promised to raise him into the innermost circle of modern
literature. Darnley, Mattie, Mrs. Otter—they were
all happy just then. He found himself sheering off any
thought of Miss Gault. But apart from Miss Gault, all
his friends were in calm waters. Even T. E. Valley, so
Darnley had informed him, was in a state of comparative
peace of mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found himself and Miss Gault to be the only unhappy
ones. Yes, and they were the only consciousnesses
in the whole circle who gave a thought to that cemetery!
When he and Miss Gault were dead, not a living
soul would remember William Solent. Why, Mattie, the
man’s own daughter—not even once had Wolf been able
to persuade her to visit that grave!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Oh, how he hated his work in that classroom! He did
not only know in pitiless detail every map upon the
wall .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and feel toward it as something removed from
every tincture of happiness .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. he also knew every ink-stain
and fly-stain upon the wall. Those dirty marks were
of equal importance with the maps. Both the marks and
the maps represented a world that was totally bleak
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a world of doleful invention, of disconsolate fancy
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and yet a world in which he had to spend by far
the larger part of his life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had just managed to cope with this desolate world
by giving himself up to his secret vice the very second
he left the school-gate. But those ecstatic sensations were
now gone for ever! He might tear his nerves to pieces
with his effort to get those feelings back. They would
never come back! They were lost. How did human beings
go on living, when their life-illusion was destroyed?
What did they tinker up and patch up inside of them to
rub along with, to shuffle through life with, when they
lacked that one grand resource? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He hurried back to Preston Lane for lunch, and was
more than successful in hoodwinking Gerda as to his
secret desolation. The girl chatted all the time about
the spending of the two-hundred! So far she had bought
nothing but one small pair of silver sugar-tongs. The
cheque had been deposited in Gerda’s name, and the girl
was touchingly proud of possessing her first “fortune,”
as she kept calling it. She apparently intended spending
every penny in the next few weeks! At least that was the
implication of her excited chatter; and Wolf was quite
prepared to submit.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He derived a sardonic amusement from noting the
fact that this “spiritual blood-money,” which had cost
him his secretest happiness, was apparently smoothing
away altogether the moral bruise left by the Weevil
incident. That “brown coat” might return to <span class='it'>his</span> mind
now and then. Hers it seemingly troubled no more. As
for the luckless water-rat, he did not show his face again.
Wolf’s private inkling was that he had been indignantly
dismissed, once for all, in some brief scene to which
the girl never alluded. But it may easily have been that
the lad himself was frightened by the length to which
he had gone. Wolf certainly found, in his own weary
introspection into the feelings of a cuckold, that he had a
tendency to avoid that part of the town where the
sausage-shop was! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His lunch over, Wolf strode back more dispirited than
ever to the scene of his pillory.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had come to loathe every aspect of that chair and
desk which made up his spiritual scaffold. There he
talked and fidgeted while those rows of cropped heads
and protruding ears nodded and swayed like shocks of
ruffled wheat under the conscientious, pitiless repetition
of a recurrent winnowing. And this was destined to be
his life indefinitely, <span class='it'>sans</span> the remotest chance of a change
for the better, unless his mother, as a successful businesswoman,
gave him a pension!</p>

<p class='pindent'>What a mess he had made of his life! As he surveyed
those spots and blurs and marks on these odious walls,
he began to recognize the fact that until the last two or
three days he had never faced reality at all. His heavenly
vice, hugged to himself like a fairy bride, had protected
him from reality. Here he was, thirty-six years old, and
as far as <span class='it'>real reality</span> was concerned—the reality his
mother lived in, the reality Darnley lived in—he was
as innocent and preoccupied as a hermit who reads nothing
but his breviary.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had lost his breviary now, his Mass-book, his Mass!
He had lost his whole inner world; and the outer world—what
was it but rows of puzzled, protruding ears, into
which, for an eternity, he had to pump tedious, questionable
information?</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he left the classroom that evening, he waited for
Darnley outside the building.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must see Christie first!” he kept repeating, as he
watched the boys file out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Will you do something for me, old friend?” he said,
as soon as his colleague appeared. Darnley fixed his
mackerel-coloured eyes upon him in patient surprise.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Even unto the third part of my kingdom, Solent!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, keep Mattie waiting for once, and go to tea
with Gerda. Will you do that? Tell her I’ve got one of
my walking-fits upon me and <span class='it'>have</span> to have some air.
Tell her not to be worried, even if I’m late for supper.
Of course, I don’t mean you to stay all that time. But
just tell her I shall be late; and she’s not to worry.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But what on earth’s up, Wolf? Where, if a person
may ask, are you going to run off to?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, it’s all right,” Wolf said quietly. “I’m not sure
yet where I <span class='it'>shall</span> go. Possibly I’ll pay a visit to Mattie
and tell her to expect <span class='it'>you</span>! Don’t bother me with any
details, my dear! Only, if you love me, go over to Preston
Lane and make yourself amusing to Gerda and enjoy
her tea. And make her understand that it’s all right.
That’s the great thing .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that it’s all right!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf fancied there was a dim expression of disquietude
in his friend’s face as he nodded to him and hurried
off; but he felt as if he would have run a worse risk
just then than to disquiet Darnley. Hurriedly he made his
way to the Malakite shop. “She’s got Olwen in there
now,” he said to himself. “She won’t want to see me.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But while he still kept repeating the words, “She
won’t want to see me,” he rang the bell in the little side-alley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>To his surprise the door was opened immediately, and
Christie herself, in cloak and hat, stood before him.
“You!” the girl cried. “Well, you’d better come with me!
Olwen has begun murmuring something about cake; and
I’ve got none in the house. I’ve left her with Father, over
their tea. They’re both slow eaters; so we needn’t rush
<span class='it'>too</span> madly. Let’s go this way!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She led him up the quiet incline leading to the King’s
Barton road. He could guess now which was the actual
confectioner’s to which she was hurrying him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a
little shop he had often passed on his way in and out of
the town.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The horizontal sun was shooting its rays through great
dark banks of western clouds as they approached this
shop; and from its windows the fiery reflections fell
upon the road like the reflections of barge-lanterns into
an estuary.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wolf! I never knew how exciting she was, how intelligent
she was! Oh, Wolf, it’s wonderful! We suit each
other down to the ground.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He snatched at her hand and pressed it hard. Never
in all his relations with her had he caught such a tone
in her voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they turned into the Barton road, there was
wafted into their faces one of those wandering winds
that seem to carry a burden of earth-mysteries from one
unknown spot to another.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What an evening it is!” she cried. “I smelt primroses
then!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s moss, I expect, and dead leaves,” he said, “from
the woods over there.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They soon reached the little shop; and he entered it
with her, and helped her to choose the cake.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where are you going, Wolf? Over to Barton? Over
to Pond Cottage?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He held open the door for her in silence. There was a
bell fixed upon the top of this door, which rang noisily
at he closed it behind them. His nerves were so strained
that this harsh jangle above their heads seemed ominous
to him—seemed to have a sound of warning, like a reef-bell
at sea.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes,” he said dreamily. “Over to Barton .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. over to
Lenty Pond.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl missed this slip of the tongue.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is your sister happy, Wolf?” she asked. And then,
without waiting for an answer: “Do you know what Olwen
said just now? She said she’d like to live with me
when Mattie was married!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf prodded the ground with his stick. “Did she
really? What a wise little girl! And what did you answer?
I don’t see why you shouldn’t have her! I’m sure
it would be all right now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie sighed deeply, a long breath.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“<span class='it'>Would</span> they agree to it? Do you think they’d agree
to it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t see why not,” he repeated, in a low voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If you see Mattie tonight, Wolf, I wish you’d sound
her about it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and Mrs. Otter .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just to see how
they’d take it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He made no reply to this; but drawing under his arm
her free hand, and straightening his shoulders, he gazed
up the road.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you remember our night in the cornfield, Chris?
After that game of bowls?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She lifted her head and looked sharply at him, and
he received the impression that he had struck an unseasonable
note.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m not one for forgetting, Wolf. You ought to know
<span class='it'>that</span> by this time.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Urquhart gave me two hundred pounds for finishing
his book, Chris. I’ve never told you that, have I?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But she had turned her face away now and was evidently
thinking about Olwen, and getting anxious to return.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I’m so glad, my dear!” Her voice was sympathetic,
but it was the calm sympathy of a friend, not the
vibrant sympathy of a lover.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What a detached little thing she is,” he thought; and
the memory came over him, with a rush of wild self-pity,
of all they had whispered together in that cornfield.
“I’ve never told her about my ‘mythology’ .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but she
ought to know, she ought to know what that two hundred
means!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I must run back. Olwen will have finished her
tea.” And she tightened her hold upon the cake and made
a little movement to draw her arm away. But Wolf
burst out then with a final impulse of desperation:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It was a vile job. It’s a vile production to be paid
all that for! He’s printing it in Bristol <span class='it'>now</span>. It’ll just
suit your father’s clients! How do you think I’ll appear
to myself after this, Christie?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl tossed her head proudly. “Oh, the clients!”
she cried. “You’re extremely moral tonight, Wolf! I
daresay you thought <span class='it'>my</span> book would please the clients!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I read just a page,” he said. But he released her arm
now and only held her there by the grimness of his mood.
“To sell my soul to Urquhart! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to do what young
Redfern <span class='it'>wouldn’t</span> do!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She did look up at him now with a flash of penetration.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But, Wolf—any deviltry he threatened you with, was
to <span class='it'>make</span> you do it, wasn’t it? Well! You’ve done it.
You’ve submitted. He can’t hurt you now, can he?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But the book—the book, Chris!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl gave a faint little laugh .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the laugh of an
air-sprite for whom these human scruples were growing
intolerably tedious.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “Well, there are plenty of
things Gerda will be glad enough to buy with this money.
You’re different from what I thought you were, Wolf, if
you let an absurd fancy like this prey on your mind!”
She paused a moment and then said gravely, “But
Mother would have understood what troubles you.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She seized the sleeve of his coat with her fingers, and
then stood silent, looking fixedly at him. Then she sighed
very heavily, and, lifting up his arm to her face, pressed
her lips to his wrist. After that she stared at him once
more, in intense contemplative scrutiny.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked away, across her shoulder, over the scattered
Blacksod roofs, over the Lunt meadows. Her sudden
gesture of affection and something in the white immobility
of her face made him think of the warning he
had received in Urquhart’s kitchen from that Farmer’s
Rest girl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll take a look at that pond tonight,” he thought
grimly. “If that’s to be the upshot, I’d better see how it
looks of a fine March evening!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, give Olwen a kiss for me, Chris; and if I find
Mattie at home I’ll certainly try her out about that. I
believe myself that she’ll agree to it. She’s so self-absorbed
just now that I think she’ll be glad to be left
free. Well .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. God bless you, Chris! Don’t drop the
cake. Good-bye .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. good-bye!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He did not look back after they separated, but the
sound of her light-running footsteps made his heart feel
desolately empty.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His last hope of recovering his old self seemed to sink
down like a child’s sagging balloon, pricked by a bodkin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She doesn’t know. She’s full of Olwen; and she
doesn’t know,” he said to himself. But could he have
<span class='it'>made</span> her know, even if he’d gone back with her? She
didn’t ask him to go back. Why should she? But <span class='it'>could</span>
he have made her know, even if she had? He had never
told a living soul about his “mythology.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He grasped his stick by the middle now; and in place
of William of Deloraine, there came into his head the
Homeric description of Hector of Troy, when, with his
great spear held in just that way, he imposed a truce
upon the combatants!</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he caught himself with this thought in his mind
he smiled at his own grandiose self-consciousness. Stoicism!
That’s what a man needed, made as he was made!
Stoical endurance of whatever fate the gods rained down
upon his head! No Trojan, no Roman, would blink and
whimper at the thought of Lenty Pond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was not long before he reached the very spot where
on the night of the bowling-match he had climbed over
the hedge with Christie, into the cornfield.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Moved to what he did by an obscure sense that this
might be “the last time,” he hurriedly scrambled through
the thickset hedge. The field was evidently destined to lie
fallow that season. He found a rusty barrow, with its
wooden shafts protruding into the air like the horns of a
buried monster; and upon this he sat down. The sun
had disappeared now, and he felt disposed to let the twilight
fall about him in that place of memory.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Slowly, as he waited, did the earth swing into greyness,
into dusk, into darkness. Cramped and chilly, he felt as
if it needed more energy than he possessed to clamber
down again into the road! A sort of waking-trance fell
upon him as he crouched there, growing more and more
cold and numb; and it was almost quite dark when he
resumed his walk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I am like a ghost that’s been damned,” he thought, as
he moved on. And indeed it was just as such a ghost
would have felt that he had the sense of being cut off
from all the magnetic reservoirs of the planet! He experienced
a physical sensation of lightness, of hollowness,
as he walked—as if he had been a husk, blown by
the faintest of all winds!</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he reached the path that crossed the fields to
the main highway, “I suppose,” he thought, “the whole
business has been inevitable since the beginning; the sort
of thing that <span class='it'>had</span> to happen, if a nature like mine lost
its pride?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he began to approach King’s Barton he noticed
that the night was going to be one of those clear, vapourless
nights, when the sky is velvety dark and the stars
exceptionally large and bright. He was walking with his
head turned towards a specially luminous constellation,
just above the arable uplands, a little to his left. Suddenly
he became conscious, as an absolute certainty, that
just above the horizon <span class='it'>behind</span> him, somewhere between
Melbury Bub and Blacksod, there was a crescent moon.
He swung round on his heel. Yes! There it was .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the
thinnest, most disembodied new moon that he had ever
seen!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He surveyed that fragile-floating illuminated curve,
comparable to nothing above or beneath the earth, and
there came over him an inexplicable desire to do reverence
to this immortal visitant. How had he known with
such certainty that there <span class='it'>was</span> a new moon behind him?
He was not yet enough of a countryman to keep any
account of these things. Well! whatever perch were left
in Lenty Pond would know about this new moon!</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he reached the wall of the churchyard, he noticed
that there was a light in one of the lower windows
of that great Perpendicular Tower. He paused and contemplated
this light. In that vapourless darkness its effect
in the middle of a great mass of masonry was singular
and arresting. While he leaned upon the low, crumbling
wall and surveyed this light, he became aware of the
sound of men’s voices—voices whispering .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. whispering
furtively and suspiciously. Suddenly, by means of
a light much less clear than the light in the window
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “It’s a lantern!” he thought .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. he detected the
forms of three men, one of them much taller than the
others, grouped around the boy’s grave. He had no sooner
caught sight of this group of noctambulists than the light
in the tower went out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Never had he felt less inquisitive, less concerned. He
was tempted to walk forward and let the whole thing
go. However, where all motives were equally futile, let
a straw turn the scale! He climbed stealthily over the
wall and advanced to the church-door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The door was wide open, and he entered the central
aisle, moving as cautiously as he could. Past the
christening-font he moved; past the back of the rear
pews. All was pitch-dark, and the peculiar smell of the
church, suggestive of mildew and worm-eaten woodwork,
was like a second darkness within the darkness.
He was arrested in his advance by the sudden appearance
of a flickering light, which proceeded from the space
under the tower where were the stone steps that led up to
the belfry.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Tilly-Valley!” he muttered to himself, as once more—as
had been happening to him so often these last few
days—he knew without question who this light-bearer
was.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Yes! He was right! Descending the belfry-steps, with
a flickering candle in his hand, came the figure of the
little priest, his thin legs first, then his cassocked body,
then his agitated white face, then his bare black scalp!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The expression of the man’s face, when he caught sight
of Wolf, was an epitome of consternation and relief, the
latter emotion rapidly overspreading the former, like a
kindly shadow crossing a distorted gargoyle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s up, Valley?” whispered Wolf, taking the vicar’s
cold, limp fingers in his own. “What are they doing
out there? Is it Urquhart? There were three of them.
They had a lantern. God, man! You’re trembling like a
leaf!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I was in my garden .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I saw them come in .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
over the hedge.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. For a long time I watched them. I
ought to have gone down to them .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I know I ought
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’ve betrayed the Sacrament by not going down to
them.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s all right,” whispered Wolf soothingly. “You
couldn’t have done anything. They’ve probably been
drinking. Monk’s with him out there. I saw him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the
great devil! The other one’s that fellow Round, no
doubt.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The priest broke away from him and began hurrying
up the aisle towards the altar, Wolf following at his
heels.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There would have been a time,” he said to himself,
“when .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. when .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf thought the clergyman was going to kneel down
or even prostrate himself; but instead of this he placed
the candle carefully upon the top of the altar, made a
hurried genuflection, and then ran round like a panic-stricken
thief to a small window in the side-transept
which overlooked the invaded spot.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Here Wolf followed him and peered out too, leaning
over his shoulder.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There were only two men to be seen now .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and
they were both busy filling up the open grave. The lantern
was on the ground, and by its light they were seen
working hard, stamping down the loose soil with the utmost
concentration and scraping away all the tell-tale
rubble from the surface of the grass. Not a word did the
men speak to one another; but it was easy enough to
recognize Monk. The other was undoubtedly the landlord
of “Farmer’s Rest.” Mr. Urquhart had disappeared.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They worked at their job so rapidly that it was not
long before the carefully folded rolls of turf-grass were
being pressed down upon that oblong heap, concealing
the raw clay. Wolf fancied he could even detect a patch
of daisies upon this replaced turf. There was a patch
of something, at any rate, that showed whitish, as the
lantern-rays fell upon it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Valley’s cassock, as Wolf bent over the little
priest, smelt unpleasantly of gin. The wall against which
he himself was pressing the palm of his hand, as he
leant forward, felt damp and chilly under the touch,
like the flesh of a corpse.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They can’t see our light, can they?” groaned the
vicar, half-turning his head. “I’ll blow it out!” whispered
Wolf in reply; and leaving the man’s side, he
walked over to the altar-steps, extinguished the flame,
and came back with the candlestick swinging from one
of his fingers, and a fume of carbonic-acid gas floating
round his head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Shifting his stick to the hand from which the smoking
candle was swinging, Wolf peered again through the
narrow window. He could feel the body of Mr. Valley
shivering; and to give the man some reassurance in the
darkness, he placed his free hand upon his shoulder.
Then, bending down, he laid both the candle and his
oak-stick softly on the flagstones.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two men at the grave seemed resolved to complete
their job with the utmost scrupulosity. “I can’t believe
they <span class='it'>are</span> drunk,” he thought. “He must have appealed to
their superstition. He must have scared them into it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>What the man had said over the Malmsey returned
to his mind. “He must have forced the coffin open!”
he thought. And then, as he stared above Mr. Valley’s
head at those two figures beating the turf down, he was
surprised to find himself completely indifferent and
impassive. Whether Mr. Urquhart had been content to
press his perturbed face against the cold featurelessness
of Redfern’s mortality, or whether, like Isabella in “The
Pot of Basil,” he had carried “so dear a head” back to
his secret chamber, seemed at that moment a question
that left him utterly incurious!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There <span class='it'>would</span> have been a time for such a word,” he
said to himself; “but <span class='it'>now</span> all is equal!” He saw Roger
Monk straddle over the grave with his long legs, move
the lantern, and whisper something to Mr. Round. From
the road outside there came the sound of children laughing
and chattering. “I wonder Urquhart didn’t wait till
midnight. Anyone might have drifted in here; but I
suppose they’d just take ’em for grave-diggers .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or be
too scared to go near ’em!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Thud! Thud! Thud!” went the spades of the two
men against the sides of the grave. Valley’s shiverings
had stopped now. Wolf heard the little man’s lips moving
in the darkness. He was muttering a Latin psalm. Wolf
now began to feel like a mute sentinel—a sentinel at
the grave of everything that had ever enjoyed the sweet
sun! Vast tracts of Dorset earth seemed spread out before
him. He could hear a low wind in the sycamores of
Poll’s Camp. He could hear the wide expanses of Blackmore
Vale sighing in their sleep. He recalled what he had
felt at his first encounter with Urquhart .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that vague
awareness of something new and strange to him in the
secret of evil. He seemed totally indifferent to all that
now! Good? Evil? It all seemed to belong to something
unimportant, irrelevant, remote. What did it matter?
This grave those two were stamping down so smoothly
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it was only one of thousands under that crescent
moon! With the heart of life killed, what did it matter
what happened to anyone?</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two men were exchanging whispers now. They
were gazing with satisfaction at their work. Wolf recognized
that his bare hand, whose outspread fingers were
pressed against the cold stone, had grown numb as he
leant hard upon it, bending forward over Valley’s
shoulder. Ay, but what an unpleasant odour .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. like
dissolution itself .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. emanated from the cold sweat of
the little priest! But the man’s shivering had subsided.
That was a good sign. No doubt the departing of Mr.
Urquhart had relieved the situation for him. As for himself,
he felt an obscure regret at the squire’s withdrawal.
So deadly callous had his emotions grown, he experienced
at that moment nothing but a weary curiosity.
Yes, it would have been interesting to see that convulsed
white face bending down over the form in the coffin! The
old villain must have crouched on the grass, when they
got the lid off, undeterred by the smell! Had Valley
seen what happened from up there in the belfry? Probably
he <span class='it'>had</span>; and the shock of it had brought him scrambling
down, torn between the outrage of the sacrilege
and his fear of the squire.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The two men were standing erect now and staring
straight towards him. Of course, they couldn’t see anything,
now that the church was dark. They must be <span class='it'>feeling</span>
the vibration of his and Valley’s intense scrutiny.</p>

<p class='pindent'>How long had his hand been lodged on Valley’s shoulder,
and why was he gripping the man so hard?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He raised his arm, so that both his palms were pressing
now against the coping of that narrow slit in the
wall. One of them was numb, but the other was hot and
pulsing feverishly. Ah, the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet!
But a time will come when there’ll be no more lanterns!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Damn that beggar Monk! He’s not satisfied yet. There
goes his spade again. Yes, take the lantern away, landlord
Round! Yes, nudge the great brute and call him
off. Yes, there <span class='it'>are</span> steps in the road. You’d better clear
off, both of you! God! I believe they’re going to quarrel!
But it’s all nothing to me now. What is a quarrel
over a boy’s grave when the ‘hard little crystal’ of a
person’s inmost self has dissolved?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’ll be a quaint moment, though, when that great
beggar gets back to the house and has to answer his
master’s bell! Will he say, ‘Yes, sir .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. no, sir,’ in
his usual tone? He talked to me once of killing the
man. Why does <span class='it'>that</span> come into my head at this moment?
But no! He’ll never do that. He’ll carry up the hot drink
and turn down the bedclothes, just as usual; and Urquhart’ll
say, ‘The moon has gone down, eh? what?’ just
in his ordinary tone! They <span class='it'>have</span> done now .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. at last.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Oh, that’s right! Don’t forget the crowbar, Mr.
Round! A crowbar? So they did intend to open the coffin!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf watched the two men make their way, slowly
and carefully, between the graves, towards the wall
that divided the churchyard from the meadow where the
school-treat had been held. Once over this wall, only
an occasional flicker of the lantern revealed their path;
and soon even that vanished.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned from the window, pulling his companion
after him. It was like touching something that had no
feeling with something else that had no feeling, to tug
at Valley’s arm with his benumbed fingers.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After three or four futile efforts, he managed, however,
to strike a match; and by the aid of this match,
moving across to the altar-steps, with his fingers guarding
the flame, he relit the priest’s candle. With a cold, weary
impassiveness .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. allowing this impulse to reach Lenty
Pond, which was indeed the only definite impulse he
retained just then, its fullest sway .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. he suggested to
the silent figure at his side that they might walk over together
to Pond Cottage. “It’ll cheer the little beggar
up,” he thought, “to have a chat with the bride and
bridegroom; and I can drop him at their gate.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>T. E. Valley seemed glad enough to postpone his return
to the desolation of his littered study. “But I
mustn’t stay long!” he murmured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>During the first part of their walk together some mutual
instinct prevented them from referring to the scene
they had just witnessed; but at last, when they had
reached Pond Lane, Valley burst out:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I hope you’re right .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. from a secular point of view
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. about my not interfering just now, Solent. From
my own point of view I shall find it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hard .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
yes, very hard .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. no, I don’t mean that .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. did I
say hard? I meant that I shall find it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
you know, Solent? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very shameful .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. forgive myself!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were walking now where the hedges were very
high and thick. Wolf began to experience a confused
exhaustion, that seemed to weigh upon his head as well
as upon his arms and legs. It was as though a knot had
been tied in the recesses of his being, which interfered
with the flow of his blood. A heavy, inert apathy settled
down upon him, which he vaguely associated with
these high hedges. “It would have been ridiculous to
meddle,” he said. “You’d have done no good. Do you
know, Valley, I think I’d like to rest for a minute!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To rest? Certainly .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. of course. You mean it would
be nice if we sat down? But it’s very dark, isn’t it?
There’s usually water in both these ditches; and they
are very deep. Hadn’t we better wait till we get to the
Otters’?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Better wait,” repeated Wolf wearily, feeling as if it
would be a heavenly thing to slip gently down now into
Lenty Pond and have done with it all; “better wait till
we get to the Otters’.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re not feeling shaky, are you, Solent? I’m rather
shaky myself. Take my arm. The air will be better soon.
It’s these hedges. I never come here alone, because of
these hedges—and—well! you know? because of that
pond over there. Don’t mind them, Solent. They’re only
high hedges and deep ditches.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf stopped motionless in the middle of the road.
“I really would like to sit down,” he said. “I mean, to
lie down! I think I must be, as you say, shaky. I expect
it’s from standing so long at that window. Would
you mind if I tried, with my stick, to feel if there <span class='it'>is</span> water
in the ditch?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If you feel dizzy, Solent, why don’t you lie down
where we are—in the road? I’ve often done that myself.
Here; lean on me! I’ll help you. That’s right. It’s quite
dry, isn’t it? Here; I’ve got a handkerchief in my pocket,
a big red one .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. it’s as big as a scarf. Here; I’ll put
it under your head .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so. Do you feel
all right now, Solent? You <span class='it'>will</span> soon, anyway. Do you
know, I’ve had some of the happiest moments of my life
lying down in the road? The road to Blacksod is very
good for lying down on, because there’s grass at the
side of it and very few carts go that way. How do you
feel now, Solent?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A relaxation of every muscle and fibre in Wolf’s body
seemed to have taken place. He gazed up at the obscure
form of the priest and at the shivering stars in the
blue-black sky.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s—just—what—I—wanted,” he murmured, with a
luxurious sigh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Valley was delighted. He hovered over him as if
he had ensconced him in his own bed. “I thought you’d
like it, Solent,” he murmured. “Sometimes when I’ve
been like this on the Blacksod road I’ve felt as if, with
the round earth beneath me carrying me between the
constellations .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and the Blessed Sacrament waiting
my return .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’ve felt as if—— What’s the matter, Solent?
Is the road too hard?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf had only been fumbling with his hand to
make sure he hadn’t lost his stick. He felt extremely
unwilling to move or to speak. But he was conscious of
a stronger wave of affection for Valley than he had ever
known before.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Does your forehead feel feverish?” his companion
enquired now, touching Wolf’s head in the darkness with
the tips of his fingers. “Don’t think I’m inquisitive, Solent;
but I’m a priest of God, and I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I notice people
that are .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. people that are .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. disturbed.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’re very nice to me, Valley. Please don’t kneel in
the road! I’ll get up in a minute. It does me good lying
here.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t think I’m inquisitive, Solent; and don’t answer
if you don’t want to. But am I right in thinking that
you’ve got something on your mind .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. something that
troubles you till you feel dizzy, like you did just now?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll get up in a moment, Valley. I’m only lying like
this now because it’s such a nice sensation! Why do you
think it’s so dark, when the stars look so large?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s these hedges, Solent. They keep the light out.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The moon’s gone down. Do you mean the light from
Pond Cottage?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Solent! You won’t mind if I say something?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No. I’m listening. Please get up. I don’t like your
kneeling.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shall I tell you what’s troubling you, what’s made
you so dizzy, Solent? It’s because Darnley is going to
be married. I know exactly what you feel. I know well
what you and Darnley are to each other. Do you know
what I think, Solent? I think it’s a shame you two
didn’t have the happiness of living together before you
both married. It’s <span class='it'>that</span> that’s troubling you; aren’t I
right? It’s thinking that your friend’s lost to you?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Nonsense, my good man!” cried Wolf, scrambling
hastily to his feet. “What has been weighing on my mind
has nothing to do with this wedding. Come! Let’s be getting
on! I left Darnley at tea with my wife; I mean, I
sent him off there.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His words were casual and careless; but Valley’s suggestion
hit him hard. It was the same hint that Miss
Gault had made last Sunday. Was it possible that the
accursed mood he’d fallen into .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. this mood of miserable
apathy .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. had as much to do with the wedding
as with the loss of his great secret?</p>

<p class='pindent'>His companion had difficulty now in keeping up with
him, so fast did he walk. Presently he said: “Tell me
this, Valley, if you don’t mind .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. did you <span class='it'>see</span> what
Urquhart was doing just now?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were close to the Otters’ house when he spoke.
He could distinguish the light from the drawing-room
shining between the branches of the poplars. Valley laid
his hand on his arm and clutched it tightly, compelling
him to stop. The man’s face was a patch of wavering
greyness against the blanket of the dark, but he could
detect its extreme distress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t—Solent—you know what I mean?—I can’t
tell you anything. It’s all misery. Yes, I saw him. It was
a long way from the tower. The belfry’s high up. I think
he loved him. <span class='it'>That’s</span> what I <span class='it'>have</span> to think; but I can
only bear it, Solent, by .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. by a little trick of mine.”
He paused; and then, to his companion’s consternation,
he uttered a ghastly little laugh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What trick, Valley, are you talking about?” Wolf
instinctively swung his arm free, for the priest’s fingernails
were hurting his flesh. “What trick do you mean?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His tone was irritable, for he was pondering in his
mind how to get rid of the man and slip off. “I <span class='it'>must</span> set
eyes on that pond before I see Mattie,” he said to himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Valley’s reply seemed to come from the darkness that
surrounded them, rather than from any localized spot.
“If .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. must .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. know .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I have .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to
pretend .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that I <span class='it'>was</span> Urquhart .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. myself!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf made no comment upon this. He looked up at
the poplars in that well-known garden. They were illuminated
on one side by a faint glimmer coming from his
old window, the window of the room where he spent his
first night in Dorset.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What a man-lover you are, Valley! <span class='it'>My</span> trick is to escape
from humanity altogether.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>To his dismay the priest’s reply to this was a repetition
of the same cackling laugh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes; to escape from it altogether!” Wolf went on.
“I don’t know why that should amuse you, Valley.” As
he spoke he became aware of something burning at the
back of the house. “Dimity must be burning refuse .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
some sort of greenery,” he thought. “It’s like the smell of
dead flowers. It’s like a bonfire of dead crocuses!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This aromatic smoke, poignant and penetrating, floating
on the air, gave him a very queer twinge. His nerves
reached out invisible tendrils to respond to it; but under
the disturbed contact between his sensations and his
<span class='it'>enjoyment of his sensations</span>, this motion of response only
caused him tantalizing discomfort. It caused him, indeed,
a discomfort of so peculiar a kind, that he prolonged his
silence almost rudely, while he gave way to it. It was a
sharp, thin, long-drawn-out sensation, like some erotic
agitation that is motiveless, meaningless, irritating.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What he felt made it more imperative than ever that
he should get rid of his companion and hurry across that
field! He turned round, tightened his hold on his stick,
and spoke with a tone of quiet authority. “Valley,” he
said, “I can’t go in at this moment. I’ve got to think a
bit .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. out here .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. by myself. You go in and tell
them so, will you? I’ll follow you in, in a second or
so, when I’ve thought something out .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in my mind.
Mattie will understand. She knows my ways. Apologize
to Mrs. Otter. No! Why should you do that? Just tell
them that Darnley’s with Gerda in town and that I’ll be
in in a minute. That’s all that’s necessary.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the priest’s fingers only tightened upon his arm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“In town? With your wife? Darnley?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Having tea with her, my good man! Those body-snatchers
have upset you completely. There! Go in and
tell them!” And with a quick movement of his wrist
he released himself from Valley’s clutch and rushed off.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found it an incredible relief to scramble over the
familiar gap in that high hedge and run with long, swift
strides across the field. It was as if all the rumours in
the village about that pond had gathered to themselves
invisible arms and were pushing him towards it. What
he felt in his own consciousness was not a simple, nor was
it a very complicated feeling. It was exactly as if the
loss of his spiritual vice had left him inordinately thirsty,
and he had an inkling that just to stare at the waters of
Lenty Pond would give him some inexplicable satisfaction.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He blundered over the dark expanse of that great field
as if Jason’s water-nymph herself had been calling to
him. Blindly, recklessly, he ran across it, stumbling over
the mole-hills, not once glancing up at the starry sky,
his stick clutched in his right hand as if it had really
been the spear of William of Deloraine, and his panting
breath coming in deep gasps. As he ran he did notice
one thing, and that was the shadowy leap of a startled
hare. The creature rose and dashed away from under his
very feet; but instead of disappearing into the darkness,
he could see, as he ran, where it had risen erect,
a short distance off, and was watching him, motionless
and with a frozen intentness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ah! There it was—Lenty Pond in the cold starlight!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He moved close up to the edge of the water. He stood
with both hands pressed hard upon the handle of his
stick. He flung his consciousness, as if it were a heavy
stone that all day long he had been carrying in his
pocket, down into those silent depths. And then his body—not
his mind, but his body—became acquainted with
shivering dread. Was his mind going to issue the final
mandate now, at this very moment? What was his body
doing that it revolted like this? What was his body doing
that its foot-soles clung to the mud as if they had been
rooted there? It was not only his flesh that now turned
sick with fear. The very bones within him began screaming—a
low, thin, wire-drawn scream—before what his
mind was contemplating. It was not that life—merely to
be alive—had suddenly become so precious. It was not
fear of Nothingness that made his body quake. <span class='it'>It was
Lenty Pond itself!</span> Yes, what his flesh and his bones
shrank from was not eternity. It was immersion in that
localized, particular, cubic expanse of starlit oxygen-hydrogen!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He visualized Mr. Urquhart and Jason surveying his
dead face. Would someone .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the “automatic young
lady,” perhaps .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. have closed his staring eyes before
those two looked at him? A fish hooked out of season!
“He ought to have taken my advice,” Jason would say,
“and gone back to that lord in London!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A phosphorescent Redfern began to manifest itself
now in that unruffled water .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a Redfern with no features
left!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This may be,” he thought, “the exact spot where he
stood.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A spasm of shame oppressed him, that he should be
so preoccupied with himself that the weight of all that
boy’s sufferings meant so little to him. Well, clean out of
it now was Jimmy Redfern! But that did not erase the
invisible pattern of misery traced upon the air at this
spot.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll ask Jason how he knew that the boy used to come
here. I’ll ask him as soon as I get back.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Get back? <span class='it'>Get back where?</span> So he wasn’t going to
utter that mandate to his panic-stricken body.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>How queer that he had nothing now left to decide! His
future was already there, mapped out before him. It
was only a matter of following the track. Yes! The
track was already there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. leading back again! All he
had to do was to accept it and follow it from moment to
moment, like a moving hand that threw a shadow over an
unfolded map!</p>

<p class='pindent'>But where did that map, that track, that diagram come
from, across which, like a sneaking shadow, he saw himself
returning to Pond Cottage?</p>

<p class='pindent'>His consciousness, hauled up, as if by a string, from
the bottom of the pond, began beating now against the
dark wall that separated him from the portion of his
being which was unrolling that map! Without his life-illusion
he was at that moment completely devoid of
pride. Afraid to jump in? Afraid of that cold water down
there? It was nothing to him if he <span class='it'>were</span> afraid! There was
no “I am I” to worry about; no Wolf Solent, with a
mystical philosophy, to look like a cowardly fool! But
whose hand was it that was unrolling the map? His own
hand? Was he, then, a furtive, secretive, desperate life-lover?
Or was it the hand of Chance? But how could
Chance unroll a map?</p>

<p class='pindent'>What was left of consciousness within him flapped like
a tired bird against the whole dark rondure of the
material universe. If only he could find a crack, a cranny
in that thick rotundity. But the thickness was his very
self! He was no longer Wolf Solent. He was just earth,
water, and little, glittering specks of fire!</p>

<p class='pindent'>For the tenth-part of a second there seemed to be a
faint cracking in this huge material envelope. But no!
All was sealed-up. The monstrous cube of black immensity
remained intact .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. darkness upon darkness.
Drawing a heavy breath, he jerked himself upright.
He had been leaning forward eagerly, preposterously,
over the handle of his stick. But now, with a peevish
effort, he tugged the thing out of the mud into which he
had been pressing it. His mind had suddenly grown
cloudy, lumpish, cloddish. He sighed deeply and let
his stick swing loosely in his limp fingers. Then bending
down with slack knees over Lenty Pond, he set himself
to splash the water, foolishly, aimlessly, with his stick’s
end. This way and that he splashed it, in the immense
stillness, under the flicker of those countless stars. And
as he splashed it he began wondering to himself in a
heavy logger-headed way why it was, that when all was
pitch-dark except for those pin-pricks in the firmament,
he could distinguish so clearly between the liquid darkness
of the water and the solid darkness of the surrounding
earth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He swung round at last, like a man who turns away
from the extinguished footlights of an empty theatre, and
began retracing his steps across the field. His dominant
sensation, as he performed this retreat, was a singular
one. He felt as if his consciousness were already ensconced
like Banquo’s ghost at the Otters’ table, while
some quite alien force was dragging across the field a
numb, inert, apathetic human body, that raised one
leaden foot after the other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was such a hubbub of voices issuing from the
drawing-room of Pond Cottage, that with a sulky motion
of the muscles of his chin, repeated several times as
he stumbled over the flower-beds, he went round the
house to the back-door. There, at his petulant tap, Dimity
Stone let him in. “Mis-ter So-lent!” the old crone exclaimed,
in her most quavering voice. “And where, for
Lawky’s sake, be Master Darnley? Sit ’ee down, Mister
Solent, while I gets me breath. These goings-on do daunt
a body terrible. ’Tis first one thing, ’sknow; and then
be another! First there be talk of a cold bite o’ summat
to save I trouble. Then what do Master Jason do but
come wambling in about hotting up they wedding-pasties
what I’ve hid all day from they since a week a-gone,
’cept what Miss Olwen coaxed out of I.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The old woman kept shuffling her utensils about, as
she spoke, from one orifice to another of her vast kitchen-stove.
A most fragrant steam emerged from more than
one lid; and Wolf, as he sat on a hard chair, with one
limp hand dangling his stick and the other dangling his
hat, was aware of a pang of extreme hunger.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And then,” she went on, “must Parson come whiffling
in, white as a lassie’s petsycut, and Mistress must uncork
a sip o’ Scotch for he; and Miss Mattie, all of a
tremble with her bride’s-night dependin’, must start crying
about Master Darnley, where ’a be and what’s keeping
o’ he.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I told Mr. Valley to tell them,” threw in Wolf, in a
low voice. “I told him to tell them.” The heat of the
kitchen, after the chill night-air, and the stress of his recent
experiences were beginning to make him feel dizzy
again. “I told him to tell them,” he repeated, trying to
concentrate his wits upon the confused voices from the
drawing-room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Dimity looked shrewdly at him. “Why, ye be dodderin’
yourself, Mister Solent! Here”—and she hurried to a
cupboard and poured something into a glass—“here
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. drink this. ’Tis me wone cordial.” And she watched
him intently, with a hand on his shoulder, as he drained
it off. “That’s better, eh? Why, you be near as white as
thik parson! ’Tis beyond I, what be coming to this
house, these turnover days.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What is it?” he murmured, spluttering and gasping,
while the blood surged back to his head; “what is it,
Dimity?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Nought but a drop o’ elder-wine,” she said, soothingly,
patting him on the head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The hubbub of voices from the drawing-room of Pond
Cottage began to grow more relevant and natural. A
moment ago they had sounded in his ears as if he had
been a spirit—a spirit whose body was left far behind,
under the water with Jason’s nymph.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I told Mr. Valley to tell them,” he repeated firmly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Missus said thik parson brought such a word,” muttered
the old woman, returning to her steaming saucepans.
At that moment there reached them both the sound
of an opening door and a man’s steps in the front-hall.
“He’ve a-come! Master Darnley be come!” cried Dimity,
hurrying out of the kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf rose from his chair, hat in one hand, stick in
the other, and followed her out.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sight of his friend’s yellow beard against the lamp
on the hall-table completed his restoration to normal
intelligence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, <span class='it'>there</span> you are!” cried the bridegroom cheerfully.
“I told Gerda I knew you’d be here all right. She was a
bit nervous about you.” He paused to hang up his coat.
The sound of their voices brought the drawing-room
door open with a fling; and Mattie rushed out, flushed
and excited. Even at the moment this occurred, however,
Darnley had time to turn a quick sideways glance towards
Wolf across the uplifted overcoat. “She’s a darling, your
wife!” he whispered emphatically.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mattie’s arms were round Darnley’s neck before his
hands were free. Wolf had never seen the two of them
embrace; and when he awoke that night by Gerda’s side,
before a window pallid with dawn, he recalled the expression
of his friend’s mackerel-coloured eyes. They
were like those of a man who pulls himself together,
naked, tense, exultant, on the brink of a rapid torrent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was Mrs. Otter herself who took Wolf’s hat and
stick away from him now; and as he shook hands with
the little lady, he was driven by an unexpected impulse
to bend down and give her a hurried kiss.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It seems the fashion,” he muttered awkwardly, as he
turned to greet Jason and T. E. Valley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I mustn’t stay for more than this,” he found himself
saying presently, as he emptied his soup-plate and lifted
his wine-glass to his lips. “Darnley says Gerda won’t
touch her supper till I get home.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You don’t know, of course, how our little girl is behaving?”
said Mrs. Otter. “Miss Malakite isn’t spoiling
her too much, I hope?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt very grateful for all the easy implications of
this little speech.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, I do, indeed,” he said, rising to his feet. “I met
Christie as I passed the shop .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. when was it? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
oh, about half-past five, I think! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and she said
Olwen was perfect.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt himself blushing as he caught Jason’s sardonic
eye. Why had he said “perfect”? But Mrs. Otter continued
quite naturally:</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s rather a test for the little thing. But Miss Malakite,
I know, will make it easy for her.” She paused
and sighed rather sadly. “It’s strange not to have her
here,” she added. “I feel as if she’d been here all her
life.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your friend Miss Gault,” said Jason, “would like
to send the police after her.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His words produced an uncomfortable silence. Darnley
rose to his feet and began sprinkling salt with his
finger and thumb upon a wine-stain he had made on the
table-cloth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If they want to keep her,” said Jason, “are you going
to let them, Mother?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s for Mattie to decide that,” murmured Mrs. Otter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your friend Miss Gault would soon decide it,” repeated
Jason. “She’d like to send her, and Miss Malakite
too, to the Ramsgard Workhouse!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Things will work themselves out as God sees best,
Jason,” remarked Mrs. Otter reproachfully. Wolf noticed
that as the lady spoke she surreptitiously laid one
of her hands on Mattie’s knee.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was at this point that Mattie herself turned to Dimity.
“You’re tired,” she said. “Do sit down now. And
listen! I don’t want you to do anything more tonight in
my room.” Wolf had always regarded it as a touching
peculiarity of Pond Cottage that the aged servant entered
freely into every conversation, as she moved about behind
the chairs; but tonight he had a premonition, before the
old woman opened her lips to reply, that she would say
something unlucky.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You can’t see no corner of Miss Olwen’s bed, Miss
Mattie,” was what she now brought out. “They things
what I’ve been ironing be all spread out over’n.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her words produced a silence even more disconcerting
than Jason’s reference to the police.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You needn’t .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. tell me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>that</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Dimity!”
cried Mattie, in a strange, high-pitched tone; and then,
snatching her hand away from Mrs. Otter, she suddenly
burst out: “You can cover up her bed with all my new
things—you can all of you do it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. yes, you can all
of you do it!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl thrust the back of her hand into her mouth,
biting the skin. Her heavy face was distorted, her bosom
was heaving. “Oh, I want my mother, I want my mother!”
she wailed, clapping both hands over her face and swaying
to and fro in her seat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This unexpected reference to a woman dead so many
years—he had no notion even as to where Lorna Smith
was buried—gave Wolf a queer shock. Mrs. Otter rose
hurriedly and threw her arms round Mattie’s swaying
head, pressing it to her breast. “My child! My child!”
she kept repeating, while Wolf prayed desperately that
the girl wouldn’t thrust her away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m all right .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’m sorry, Darnley!” came her
muffled voice at last.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Otter let her go and slid back into her seat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll help you with the plates, Dimity,” Mattie murmured,
rising and straightening her shoulders. Darnley
held the door open for her to pass out. She had snatched
up Wolf’s soup-plate and Jason’s, which were the only
empty ones.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll say good-night, then,” cried Wolf, looking at
Mrs. Otter, “and I won’t be late at the church!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He gathered together his belongings in the hall, while
Darnley, with his arm held tight round Mattie’s shoulder,
fixed his eyes gravely on every movement he made.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When Wolf had got his coat on, his friend left Mattie
standing there frowningly, with the plates still in her
hand, and opened the hall-door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-night, Wolf,” he said quietly. “She’ll be all
right now. Give my love to Gerda. By the way”—and he
lowered his voice so that Mattie shouldn’t hear him—“Gerda
says your mother wants to come; and for that
reason she’d rather come independently of you, with her
father. I told her it should be exactly as she wished.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf at that moment found it difficult to concentrate
his mind upon this nice point.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We’ll all be with you anyway, Darnley. As long as
we’re all there, it doesn’t matter <span class='it'>how</span> we turn up, does
it? Well, good luck to you!” But he had no sooner got
his friend’s fingers in his own than he impulsively
dropped them. Catching the man’s head between his
hands, he kissed him rapidly several times on the forehead.
“Good luck to you!” he repeated, as he strode off
down the garden. “I kissed the mother; why not the
son?” he thought, as he reached the gate; but something
produced a constriction in his throat that was akin to a
sob. “Down, wantons .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. down!” he murmured audibly,
as he fumbled for the latch of the gate.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had scarcely found it, however, when the house-door
behind him opened and a hurly-burly of voices
reached him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But you’ve not even finished your soup!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
“You’ve only had one glass!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “You might wait
till Dimity has brought——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His first idea was that these cries were intended for
himself; but as he wavered there, in puzzled indecision,
there came hurrying down the path, like a stray dog
bolting for home, the agitated figure of T. E. Valley. The
little priest was struggling into his overcoat as he ran,
and repeating, “I’ve had all I want! I’ve had all I want!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good-night, Wolf! Take care of him, for heaven’s
sake!” rang out Darnley’s voice from the door, as the
two men emerged into Pond Lane. They saw the light
vanish away. They heard the door close. They were once
more alone together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well,” said Wolf, “I suppose we go <span class='it'>this</span> way, eh?”
and he made a motion to turn to the right.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Would .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. mind .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Solent,” pleaded
the man piteously, “if we went the <span class='it'>other</span> way? I <span class='it'>could</span>
go alone .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. but .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you know? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I’m feeling a
little upset tonight .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Right you are, my friend!” said Wolf, with a sigh.
“I daresay Gerda will forgive me. But I’m already a
bit late; so let’s walk briskly! Why”—he was already
moving in the required direction, with the man’s arm
in his own—“do you want to go so far round?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Valley’s mind had reverted again to the scene at
the grave.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The belfry-window was a long way off. I was fretting
so much, too, thinking I ought to go down and stop it.
Perhaps it <span class='it'>was</span> natural.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I should feel like that myself
if it weren’t for the Sacrament .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I mean if .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
you know? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The priest’s mutterings rose and fell like a cloud of
weakly-humming gnats, over a twilit tow-path. Wolf continued
to feel as if he were a wooden puppet galvanized
into meaningless activity by a complicated system of
wires. “If only they’d let me lie down,” he thought, “just
lie down for a hundred years, I’d deal with them all!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once more alone and striding homewards, he teased
his memory about the name of an especially luminous
constellation that hung in the west directly over Blacksod.
“The most contemptible people are allowed to enjoy
the stars,” he said to himself; and then he thought: “A
lump of cowardice without past or future! But this lump
has two legs to carry it, and a stick to prod the ground
with. Ailinon! Ailinon! But I’ll make Gerda laugh when
I tell her about Tilly-Valley.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It gave him one of the first pleasant feelings he had
had that evening, to think of making Gerda laugh. “I
won’t tell her till we’re in bed,” he thought. And then
he thought: “I wonder if Olwen and Christie will sleep
together tonight?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he moved between the well-known hedges of that
road, along which just a year ago he had been driven by
Darnley, he experienced a singular sensation. He felt as
though he were beginning a <span class='it'>posthumous</span> life—a life that
his own cowardice had snatched from the end intended.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was as if such an end <span class='it'>had</span> actually been reached
upon some psychic plane; so that now he but “usurped
his life.” Never would he know what actually happened
at that King’s Barton grave, any more than he would
know what Miss Gault did after he left her in the Ramsgard
Cemetery. But such things could not altogether pass.
Must there not be some imprint of them left upon space
itself? If so, such air-pictures might easily remain intact,
even after the planet itself was uninhabited and
frozen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In his agitation he began fumbling at the handle of
his stick, and he noted how the deep indents cut by
Lob Torp on that night of the “Yellow Bracken” had
grown smooth and slippery with handling.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What I really am is dead,” he kept saying to himself.
“That’s what I am .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>dead</span>.” But out of his balanced
indifference, like a man astride of a floating log,
who by a miracle has escaped a whirlpool, he began to
feel conscious of a faint satisfaction in the mere fact of
having experienced that rush of the cold air about his
ears and that splash of froth upon his cheek.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What he had to do now was to gather his forces together
for a daily and nightly dialogue with the Cause
of all Life and of all Death! As he came along into the
outlying district of Blacksod, he visualized this Cause as
an enormous shell-fish placidly breathing in and breathing
out on the floor of a sea-like infinity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was staring at its fixed, idiotic eyes, and at its long,
motionless antennæ, when he passed the turn to the Malakite
shop. Then something in him, beyond all reasoning,
loosened, stirred, leapt up.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “Oh, Christie! Oh, my
little Christie!”</p>

<div><h1 id='chap24'>“FORGET”</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>In the middle of that night Wolf was aroused to
consciousness by the voice of Gerda anxiously soothing
him; and even in his confusion he was aware at that moment
of something exceptionally tender in her tone, something
protective, something different altogether from a
young creature’s spontaneous alarm at being disturbed
in its sleep! It was as if all the agitations of that last
fortnight had unfolded some psychic bud or frond within
her being, changing her from a capricious child into a
full-grown sweet-natured woman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What did I say?” he asked, as his head fell back upon
the pillow.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ‘I shall break between you,’ you cried. ‘I shall break
between you!’ And then, when I said, ‘<span class='it'>Between who,
Wolf?</span>’ you said, ‘Between <span class='it'>them</span>! Can’t you see? Between
those two men!’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Men, Gerda? Did I say <span class='it'>men</span>?” And then suddenly,
like a retreating image in a deep mirror, he remembered
what his dream had been. He was himself a brittle stick,
a piece of dead brushwood. At one end of him was the
Waterloo tramp. At the other end of him was that complacent
old man with the white cat. He had awakened in
terror because he felt himself beginning to crack, as
those two antagonists tugged.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After caressing Gerda with an emotional relaxation,
such as the self-pitying weakness of a fever might have
left, he settled himself again to sleep. His final thoughts
were concerned with the meaning of his dream; but
beyond a fumbling association of the Waterloo waif
with the loss of his “mythology,” and the sleek cat-man
with an acceptance of life on its lowest terms, the riddle
remained unsolved.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He awakened next morning to a vivid awareness that
this Friday was the eve of Darnley’s wedding. He recalled
his first encounter with his friend in that tea-room of the
Lovelace Hotel; and his mind reverted to the waiter who
was now a beggar. “Stalbridge,” he thought. “A good
man. I wish I’d given him that half-a-crown.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he shaved himself at the familiar looking-glass, he
entered upon a cheerful discussion with Gerda as to
what they had better decide to do on the following day.
Gerda displayed no hostility to Mrs. Solent’s company,
but indicated that it would please Mr. Torp if she went
with him rather than with them; and as for their return
to Blacksod after the wedding-feast, <span class='it'>that</span> could be left to
chance!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There’ll be lots of carriages coming and going,” she
said, “and it’ll be fun to see what happens! I shan’t
mind,” she went on, “if we all walk home in a crowd.
But I <span class='it'>would</span> enjoy going with Father. It’ll be like the
old days, when I used to go to funerals with him. He likes
to go to places with me when I’m all dressed up.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I suppose Darnley will be at school today just as
usual,” said Wolf; “but they’ve given him a week off.
They’re going to Weymouth. Did I tell you that?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“To lodgings?” enquired Gerda. “We all took lodgings
once, Wolf; one Whitsun .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in Adelaide Crescent.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No; it was an hotel, I think,” said Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The Burden?” she cried excitedly. “Oh, how I’d love
to stay at the Burden! I’ve never stayed in an hotel in my
life. I’ve never been <span class='it'>into</span> an hotel except the ‘Three Peewits.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was silent for a second. Then he said slowly,
contemplating his half-shaven face in the mirror with
as much detachment as if it had been a cat’s saucer of
milk, “Well, we might go in to see them next Saturday.
They wouldn’t be leaving till the afternoon, I suppose.
We could all have lunch at the Burden.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wolf,” she cried, sitting up straight in bed—a movement
that brought her head into the square of his mirror—“Wolf!
Why can’t we spend some of our money in a
week-end at the Burden? Not this week, of course; but
next week, just as they’re coming back! Oh, I would love
that so much!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>A wave of sadness swept over him. It was on the tip
of his tongue to reply to her in her own words of last
Sunday—“It’s too late, my dear, it’s too late!” For that
beach in front of Brunswick Terrace came back to him,
with the cries of the fish-sellers, with the dazzling sun-path
on the breaking sea, with the wet planks and the
painted boats. Ay, how he would love to see it all again—but
who was he to see it? Hollow! Hollow! A drifting
husk, empty of purpose and hope!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t see why we shouldn’t do just as you say,
sweetheart. But let’s get through tomorrow first, before
we decide. But I don’t see why we shouldn’t stay one
night, at any rate, at the Burden.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He caught her eyes in the glass, and they were radiant.
She was actually clapping her hands, as she heard him;
and the cry of delight she gave seemed to him to have
the sound of whistling in it!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Yes, even if he were doomed to drift now like a purposeless
automaton, it was something to be able to cause
such childish exultation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda wanted to be free that day from the trouble of
preparing a midday meal, so it was arranged that he
should get a bread-and-cheese lunch at the Three Peewits.
Perhaps Darnley would be ready to share it with him!
At any rate Gerda should be left to her own devices until
tea-time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All that morning, as he supervised his boys’ lesson,
his mind ran upon what she had said about Weymouth.
How strange that he had himself proposed to Christie
that <span class='it'>they</span> should go down there this very Sunday .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
quite independently of the Burden Hotel! Everything
in his life seemed gravitating just then towards Weymouth—towards
that birthplace of his murdered “mythology”—but
too heartless was he now to care a straw!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I won’t spoil Gerda’s happiness by breathing a word
about <span class='it'>this</span> Sunday,” he said to himself; “and very likely,
anyway, Christie will have forgotten. Olwen has cut me
out. That’s the long and the short of it. Olwen has cut
me out!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he stared at the ink-stains on the wall, he found
himself selecting one particular stain to serve as a raft
in the dead-sea drift of his trouble. This stain was an
elongated one; and before he knew what he was doing,
he had turned it into a road—a road like that road in
the Gainsborough picture.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As one boy after another came up to his desk with
some sort of written answer to the tedious historic question
he had propounded to them, his mind began to
envisage, with a rapid bird’s-eye glance, all the years of
his life, and the dominant part that had been played in
them by this <span class='it'>ideal road</span>. He seemed to be able, as he
stared at that elongated ink-stain, to recall fragments of
old memories such as he had not thought of even once
during the last twelve months! The longer he stared at
that mark upon the wall the more rapidly those memories
crowded in upon him. A village-green where a hollow
tree had its roots in a duck-pond .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. two high banks
covered with patches of purple clover and yellow rock-rose,
where the dusty highway under his feet led to the
top of a hill, from which he knew, by a sure instinct,
the sea was visible .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a deserted garden at the crossing
of one thoroughfare with another, outside some cathedral-town,
where nettles mingled with currant-bushes
and where an old woman was shouting to an old man
across a brook full of watercress .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. images of this
kind, like mystical vignettes in the margin of an occult
biography, kept passing and repassing along the road of
his life—that is to say, along that elongated ink-stain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>So fast did such memories crowd in upon him that he
grew consciously surprised at their presence, as a drowning
man might be surprised at the concentration of a
whole life’s experience into a second of time!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He even remembered one particular occasion, in the
outskirts of London, when he had made up his mind that
those glimpses of things seen under a certain light were
the sole purpose of his existence! He recalled the exact
spot where he reached that conclusion. It was upon a
bench, somewhere beyond Richmond, under some enormous
lime-trees. He remembered how he had decided
then that these particular episodes, snatched out of the
flowing stream of visual impression, were more charged
with the furtive secret of life than any contact with men
and women. He remembered how he had pulled up a
cool dark-green tuft of grass by the root, so excited had
that conclusion made him; and how afterwards he had
busied himself for some while in a conscientious attempt
to replant it, using his stick as a trowel, greatly to the
amusement of a flirtatious pair of shop-girls, who regarded
him from a recumbent position under one of those
trees.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was ironical that at this very moment, when the
power of his enjoyment of it had been killed, he seemed
able to articulate his philosophy of the <span class='it'>ideal road</span> more
definitely than he had ever done before. What it really
had meant, this philosophy, was a power of seeing things
<span class='it'>arranged under a certain light</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a light charged with
memories of the past .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a light capable of linking his
days in flowing continuity! Well, it was all lost now .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
lost because it implied a certain kind of Wolf who was
enjoying it; and <span class='it'>that</span> kind of Wolf was stone dead.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Harrison Minor, what are you thinking of? You’ve
cribbed this straight from Martin Major!” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His voice must have assumed something of the harsh
bitterness of his mood; for a lot of heads were raised from
the desks, and there was a hurried whispering in Harrison
Minor’s corner.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Reality has beaten me,” he said to himself. “What
I feel now must be exactly what religious people feel
when they believe themselves to be damned! They can
talk of other matters; they can respond when you approach;
but while they are chatting with you of this and
that, there is always <span class='it'>perdition</span> lying at the bottom of
their thoughts!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Every boy whose paper has been marked must go on
quietly, please, with the Restoration!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Olwen has cut me out. That’s the long and short of
it. It was all in vain, that day in the cornfield! ‘Mind
touching mind, without need of words,’ did we say? But
she’ll be happy with Olwen. Mattie will <span class='it'>have</span> to let her
have Olwen.” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he met Darnley, after that heavy morning was
over at last, he learnt that Jason too would be at the
Three Peewits. Darnley was silent and preoccupied as
they walked through the streets; and Wolf set himself to
accept the fact that they were destined to go on drudging
at this School, side by side, <span class='it'>sans</span> intermission, to the end
of their days! Precisely as they walked through these
streets today, between School and Tavern, so would
they be found walking twenty, thirty years hence, each
meditating his own secret cares!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Chance had ordered it that not only was Jason awaiting
them in the Three Peewits dining-room. There, in the
best window-seat, with a bottle of Burgundy in front of
him, sat Mr. Urquhart himself! Jason was drinking beer
from a two-handled pewter flagon and helping himself
with relish from a large rook-pie, covered with a crust
of flaky pastry, that stood before him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Both he and Urquhart had an air of having been established
in their places for many hours. They were,
however, as far removed from each other as two guests
in the same dining-room could possibly be! Wolf and
Darnley went across to the squire and shook hands with
him; and then, sitting down at Jason’s table, they both
ordered the same brand of Dorchester Ale, but in lesser
proportion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There’s enough for you two,” said Jason, referring to
the pie before him. “You’re allowed second helpings here.
I’ve had mine.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How did those rogues make ’ee come in to town today,
Otter?” remarked Mr. Urquhart, pulling his chair
round, but keeping his elbow on his table and his fingers
on the stem of his wine-glass.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They’ve given me all next week off,” replied Darnley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve been saying that <span class='it'>I</span> ought to have a holiday too,
just in his honour,” threw in Wolf, feeling as if there
were a pail of ashes in his belly that nothing he drank
could so much as moisten.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This intercourse between the two ends of the room
seemed to displease Jason. His face assumed its most
stony expression, and he bent low over his plate.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They’ve good custards here,” he remarked, after a
pause. “Custard’s much better than those puddings that
your friend Mrs. Stone makes.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t call her Mrs. Stone, Jason,” murmured Darnley,
with a peevishness unusual to him in addressing his
brother. “Wolf’s as much a friend of Dimity as any of
us.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>For half-a-second Jason’s brows contracted ominously;
and then his whole countenance relaxed into a thousand
humorous wrinkles.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’ll be a better friend to her still, when he’s tasted
those wedding-pasties of yours, Darnley!” he said, holding
up his tankard and making a sly motion with one
eyelid and one shoulder in the direction of Mr. Urquhart,
to whom his back remained turned.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a moment’s interruption at this point, while
the waiter was laying in front of the newcomers the beer
and cheese they had ordered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You needn’t look like that at my pie,” said Jason.
“Everyone isn’t going to be married tomorrow!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Hurry up with your new poems,” retorted Darnley,
“and then you’ll be able to treat us all to these luxuries.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Jason had turned his sardonic eye upon Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Solent can tell you what marriage is. He can tell you!
You needn’t think a person doesn’t know what <span class='it'>you’ve</span>
got in your head as you see me enjoying myself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What have I got in my head, Jason?” asked Wolf. His
tone was meek enough; but the black bile of reciprocal
malice was seething in the veins of his throat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Abuse of me, because of these rooks,” chuckled the
other. “You’re longing to spoil my pleasure by telling
everyone about their cawings and their proud nests. But
<span class='it'>you’d</span> like a taste as well as anyone .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. if there were
no one here to see you!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>These words of Jason’s, and the look that accompanied
them, caused Wolf a discomfort that resembled the squeezing
of a person’s tongue against a hidden gum-boil. It
was impossible for him to help endowing with glossy, outspread
wings the unctuous morsel into which the poet
just then dug his fork! He felt the blood pricking him
under his cheek-bones. He thought of Miss Gault. He began
to suffer from that old, miserable sensation that his
body was a lump of contemptible putrescence, on the
top of which his consciousness floated. This was the sort
of occasion when in former days he used to summon up
his “mythology.” Well, that was all over now. He felt
as disintegrated as the remnants on the poet’s plate. He
<span class='it'>was</span> those remnants. Dorsetshire had eaten him up!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The voice of Mr. Urquhart became audible to him.
The squire was explaining in a querulous voice that the
man Monk had been so truculent that morning that he
had set the whole household by the ears. “Mrs. Martin
came to me like a virago and threatened to give notice,”
he said. “I thought it best to beat a retreat. Always beat
a retreat when servants mutiny, eh? What?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As Wolf blinked at him across the foam of his beer-mug,
he began to feel as if that vigil of his at the church-window
had been a pure hallucination. “Redfern’s grave
will look the same as it always has,” he thought, “when
I next see it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you enjoy your walk this morning, Jason?”
enquired Darnley, pulling at his beard. His brother regarded
him with a long, sad, intent look.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The clouds were like gentle spirits,” he repeated
slowly. “They were coming from eternity and could not
stay. The fields were wet with dew for them. But they
could not stay. The hazel-bushes were sobbing with sap
for them. But they could not stay. The daisies were white
with love for them. But they could not stay.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As the man spoke, he placed his knife and fork carefully
side by side, drank what was left of his great tankard,
and replaced it on the table as scrupulously and
softly as if it had been a living thing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They were going <span class='it'>to</span> eternity,” he added in a low
voice. And then, while his melancholy grey eyes assumed
a look of such abysmal sorrow that Wolf wondered
to behold it, “God comes and God goes,” he said,
“but no one feels Him except moles and worms. And they
are blind and can’t see. They are dumb and can’t speak.
I thought this morning, Darnley, that my poetry is no
better than the tunnels of moles and worms.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s that your brother’s saying, Otter,” came the
voice of Mr. Urquhart across the room. “Is he making
rhymes about the waiter? Do ’ee tell him to be careful!
Lovelace says a man was kicked out of his club in town
for doing less than that; and besides .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in this room,
you know .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. though we’ve got——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was interrupted by the clatter of a horse’s hooves
outside the windows, and Wolf could just see, out there,
the corner of a nursery-gardener’s cart crowded with
blue hyacinths.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As Wolf stared at those flowers, he caught Urquhart’s
eye.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s nothing to you, Solent, I suppose,” he remarked,
“but the proofs of my book came from Bristol this morning!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf murmured his congratulations; but into his mouth
rose the sensation of the colour brown.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He has got his wish over Redfern,” he thought, “and
now he’s got his book too.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart was addressing the young waiter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Didn’t know I was an author, Johnnie, did you? Mr.
Solent there and I have just brought out the very book
for a sly rogue like you! I’ll send ’ee a copy, me boy!
Don’t forget, now! Ask me for it, if you don’t get it
soon!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>What Wolf felt, as he listened to this, was that all
the mysterious evil that he had associated with this man
was in reality nothing more than senile perversity. Jason
was right. But if Jason was right with regard to Urquhart,
wasn’t he likely to be right with regard to Wolf
Solent? To Jason’s mind .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to Jason’s peculiar satisfaction
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. evil was no more than a thin-drifting, poisonous
rain, that seeped through into everything. Nothing
was free from it, except perhaps the passionate heart
of Olwen! But it was just a slimy rain. It had no spiritual
depths. Mr. Urquhart and himself had been playing
together a pleasant theatrical drama .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. all gesture,
all illusion! Upon Jason’s plate of well-cleaned rook-bones
lay the fragments of their high Satanic play!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart had called the young waiter to his side
now. Darnley and Jason were talking in low voices about
the arrangements for tomorrow.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was then that an incredibly sweet fragrance came
in through the open window! It may have been only the
hyacinths; but, as Wolf breathed it in, it seemed to him
much more than that. It seemed to come from masses of
bluebells under undisturbed green hazels!</p>

<p class='pindent'>This happy sensation, however, was not permitted to
him for long. In a second there followed a vibrant, penetrating
drumming .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. an aeroplane! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. With the
beat of a demon’s sharded wings this sound drew nearer
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. steadily nearer and nearer.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Urquhart turned his head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Those young airmen are fine lads,” he remarked.
“I’d let any one of those chaps carry me to Thibet or
Cambodia if he’d give me the chance.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf noticed a strange light of excitement come into
Darnley’s blue eyes; and it was Darnley who spoke now.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to fly!” he cried. “To clear your soul of
all the earth-horrors! To wash your mind clean, in a blue
bath of air! Think of it! To fly over land and sea till you
realize the <span class='it'>roundness</span> of the earth! To feel your mind
changing .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. becoming a purer instrument .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. as you
leave this cluttered world!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The drumming of the aeroplane was now accompanied
by the harsh snorting and snarling of a large motor-car.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Whether it’s by air or by road,” observed Jason, in
the tone of a very old hermit, “these young men come
down upon us; and it’s best to win favour of the Lords of
Science.” He glanced sideways at the waiter. “They come
by sea too, sometimes,” he added, hunching his shoulders
in mock-alarm. “This young man looks like a chief
engineer on a liner,” he went on, lowering his voice to a
whisper, and glancing at his brother.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf began to feel as if he were stranded alone on a
high, exposed platform, hooted and shrieked at by thousands
of motors and aeroplanes.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Beads of sweat stood out on his forehead. It was as if
he searched in vain for any escape into the silences of
the earth. No escape was possible any more! He was
combed-out, raked-over, drained of all sap! His destiny
henceforth must be to groan and creak in the wind of
others’ speed.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s a miracle,” repeated Darnley, “to be able to
transform the whole bias of the mind by turning away
from land and water and making the air our element!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man’s singular-looking eyes were literally translucent
with excitement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m afraid it’s not of Mattie he’s thinking,” said Wolf
to himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Mr. Urquhart had just made some remark to his
ex-secretary that Wolf had been too absorbed in his
thoughts to hear. “I beg your pardon, Sir!” he murmured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“That’s the value of a book like ours, eh, me boy?”
cried the Squire. “It’ll be kept on newspaper-stands on
the top of great iron landing-stages for people to pick up
as they start for Australia or Siberia! It’ll tickle their
fancy, eh? What? By Jove it will .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to learn what
lecherous snakes their ancestors were.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I didn’t tell you, did I, Solent,” said Darnley innocently,
“that when I called at the Malakites’ to let
Olwen know I’d take her home this evening, the little
minx refused to budge? She swears she won’t leave
Christie for a single night! There’d have been tears if
I’d insisted. Well! It’ll be .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. perhaps .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. easier”—he
spoke pensively and slowly now—“if she does remain
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. where she is.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Girls are all the same,” remarked Jason. “They all
like sugar and spice. Old Malakite probably buys more
tasty sweets for her in this town than she gets with us.”
There was something about this speech that was more
than Wolf could bear. He rose abruptly to his feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sorry, Darnley,” he said. “I forgot something I have
to do before afternoon school! It won’t be more than that,
will it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. what I’ve had?” and he laid down a shilling
and three pennies upon the table. A grotesque consciousness
of the way his quivering upper-lip projected
and the way his hands shook, filled his brain as he spoke;
but he bowed to Mr. Urquhart as he went out, and nodded
civilly at Jason. “We’ll meet later,” he said, giving Darnley
one rapid reproachful look as he left the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once in the street, he paused, hesitating. He felt as if
he were as much exposed to the gaze of the crowd as if
he had been one of the featherless birds of Jason’s pie!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Instinctively he began to make his way through the
crowd towards the Malakite shop. Recognizing the import
of this movement, he mentally confronted the only
alternative to it .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that of hanging about for half-an-hour
in his deserted classroom. No! <span class='it'>That</span> would be misery
too great! But when he reached the shop and had rung
the bell in the side-alley, he felt tempted to bolt. The
presence of Olwen seemed to change the whole situation.
It was as if the little girl were clinging to both Christie’s
hands, held behind her back; so that she lacked the
<span class='it'>power</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. whatever her <span class='it'>will</span> may have been .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to
help him at this crisis!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He could not recall ever having waited so long at that
door as he waited now. What a lovely day it was! But
that balmy spring air .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and he could see several
clumps of pale jonquils in the little back-yard .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
floated over him as if he had been a dead man, as if he
had really been drowned last night in Lenty Pond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Here she was, running rapidly down the narrow staircase.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, I’m so glad to see you, Wolf! I’m in such trouble!
I’ve been thinking and thinking what to do.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
I prayed that <span class='it'>anybody</span> might come .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and now it’s
you! Oh, I’m so glad!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He followed her into the house and she shut the door;
and they stood close together in the little, dark entrance.
Unaware of any conscious impulse, he hugged her tightly
to his heart and held her there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. his brain a complete
blank to everything except the sense of holding her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But this relief from reality was not destined to be
permitted to him for long. The girl plucked at his wrists,
turned her head away from him, struggled to release
herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t, Wolf! Not now, Wolf! I want your help .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
don’t you understand? I don’t want <span class='it'>that</span> now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He sighed heavily, but let her go, and stood by her
side, clutching the bannisters.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What’s the matter, Chris?” he murmured humbly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Olwen wants to stay with me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to <span class='it'>live</span> with me
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. you knew that, didn’t you? But this morning she’s
been fretting about Mattie. Ever since she woke up she’s
been fretting. And now she says she’ll be quite happy
with me again if only she can go to the wedding and see
them married! She wants to go <span class='it'>tonight</span>, Wolf. That’s
what she wants .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to have a last night with Mattie
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and come back here when they leave for Weymouth;
but, you see, I had no way of reaching Darnley. Is Darnley
at school today, Wolf? I don’t know what I should
have done if you hadn’t——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was interrupted by a sound in the book-shop; and
Wolf saw her stiffen and lay her finger on her lip, and
turn a tense, concentrated, narrow-lidded stare at the door
leading into the shop.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf did not like the manner of this intense listening.
He had liked still less the tone in which she had welcomed
his appearance, not for his own sake, but as a
means of reaching Darnley! The truth began to deepen
upon him that between Olwen and the old man Christie’s
world had never been more occupied, had never
promised less free space for him and for his affairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sounds within the shop, whatever their nature,
ceased now, and she turned, smiling. She laid two small
finger-tips, light as that feather in her “Urn-Burial,”
upon his coat-sleeve.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I won’t ask you to come up now, Wolf. You always
excite her so, and I’ve just got her quiet.” She paused
and hesitated; and in the faint light of that little passage
he could see she was anxious as to just how he would
react under her appeal. “Will you see Darnley?” she
murmured. He moved back a step and nodded gravely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, listen, Wolf dear!” she went on. “Bring him
to tea here, will you? And ask him to hire a trap at the
hotel, so he can take her out there tonight. You’ll be
able to bring her back tomorrow, won’t you, Wolf .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
when the wedding’s over?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He promised submissively to do exactly what she
wanted; and opening the door to let him out, she closed
it quietly behind them both and stood by his side in the
narrow alley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once more Wolf was aware of the humming of an
aeroplane above the roofs of Blacksod! Those aeroplanes
were becoming a kind a devilish chorus to his
comic tragedy!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl lifted her head, trying to get a glimpse of it,
while he himself stared obstinately at the narrow velvet
band that encircled her waist. “Damn these machines!”
he muttered bitterly. “It’ll never be the same world
again!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She lowered her chin and looked into his face. The
sound of the aeroplane had actually brought—or so he
thought to himself in his stubborn resentment—the same
gleam into her eyes as into those of Darnley. All were
against him now .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. all, all, all! These demons were
ensorcerizing every soul he knew. The Powers of the
Air! No, he would <span class='it'>never</span> yield to them! While a single
grass-blade grew out of the deep earth, he would never
yield to them!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, Wolf, you are wrong, my dear!” she cried fervently.
“It is a new world! It is! It is! But it’s a beautiful
world. It means a new <span class='it'>kind</span> of beauty: glittering steel,
gleaming wings, free spaces——” She stopped suddenly.
He thought afterwards she must have seen something in
his expression that troubled and puzzled her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must go to Olwen,” she murmured; and then, just
as she had done before, she snatched at his hand and
raised it to her lips. “Don’t mind about the machines,
Wolf dear. Bring Darnley to tea, won’t you? And tell
him to order a trap. She <span class='it'>could</span> walk, I know. But I
don’t want her to get Mattie all tired out. Au revoir,
my dear!” And she slipped away into the house, giving
him, as she went, one of those especial smiles of hers
that were always so baffling.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Back at his desk again, Wolf was compelled to bestow
so much attention upon his boys that it was only
once in all the afternoon that he fixed his eyes upon the
mark on the wall, and gave himself up to his sullen
meditations.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This is the kind of thing,” he thought, “that I’ve got
to endure for the rest of my days, unless Mother, with
her tea-shop money, pensions me off! I could bear it! I
know well enough I could bear it, if only—— It’s nice
making Gerda laugh. It’s nice doing what Christie tells
me. But it’ll be hard to go on in this room for thirty
years.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had occasion to denounce a couple of boys, ere the
lesson was over, for a flagrant case of cribbing; and the
way in which the elder of these boys—a great hulking
lubber-head called Gaffer Barge—took all the blame
upon himself, struck his imagination far more than he
permitted that poor, sweet-natured lout to discover!
When the clock finally struck the hour, and he found
himself free, he stopped Gaffer Barge as the lad was
slouching off.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Barge,” he said, “I wonder if you would be so awfully
good as to do a little errand for me on your way
home?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There came into the boy’s face, on hearing these words,
a smile of such sheer, innate sweetness and goodness,
that Wolf was staggered. He had been, if anything, rather
abrupt and distant with the fellow in their daily relations,
and the pleasure with which the boy responded to
this unexpected request struck him in his present mood
as no less than astonishing. It was as if in this desert of
grim reality upon which he had been dropped from the
back of his divine steed, he had heard the most heavy-humped
camel utter melodious words.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How good of you, Gaffer!” he cried eagerly, using
the lad’s nickname to indicate his appreciation of this
response. “One minute, then; and I’ll write a note.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He incontinently scribbled a line to Gerda, telling her
not to expect him home till after tea. This missive he
folded up and directed to “Mrs. Wolf Solent, Thirty-Seven,
Preston Lane.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Here you are, Barge,” he said, handing it to him.
“It’s not much out of your way. But I’m really most
extremely grateful to you.” Whereat the lad slipped off,
as shyly exultant as if he had made a hundred runs in
a cricket-match.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There arose no obstacle, in the sequence of events that
now occurred, to upset Christie’s prearranged plan.
With the fly from the Three Peewits safely ordered for
seven o’clock, Darnley and Wolf took their places at
the Malakite tea-table; and a situation that certainly possessed
elements of awkwardness flowed forward as
smoothly and easily as if the girl had possessed a social
genius worthy of the subtlest adepts of high society.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Malakite was himself unusually voluble during
the earlier part of the meal, and Wolf’s attention was
thoroughly arrested by the drift of the old man’s loquacity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And so Urquhart wrote to him,” the old bookseller
was saying, “and I got his reply yesterday .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. by
the second post. Olwen met the postman and brought
it to me in the shop. You weren’t afraid of your old
granddad, were you, my chick?” He looked round
the table, as he said this, with an expression of crafty
triumph.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We mustn’t bore Darnley with our business-affairs,
Father,” interrupted Christie, “on the very eve of his
wedding-day.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Darnley too had caught the unusual quiver of
excitement in the old man’s voice, and had fixed his blue
eyes intently upon him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No, no,” he said. “Please go on, Sir; please go on.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s a relative of yours, Mr. Solent, as well as of the
squire’s, so he tells me,” continued the bookseller. “He
knew I wanted to sell out, and he sent this gentleman my
catalogue, and now I’ve got his reply .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. by the afternoon
post. Olwen gave it to me while I was on the ladder,
didn’t you, my pet? You didn’t know your granddad
could climb a ladder, did you, my pretty?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf experienced an intense distaste for the tone the
old man adopted in thus addressing his daughter’s child.
He couldn’t resist a furtive glance at Christie. But the
girl was staring with one of her fixed, inscrutable looks
at Darnley; and all he could interpret of her feelings
depended upon a certain disturbing droop of her under-lip.
Like a flash there shot through his mind a startled
doubt as to the wisdom of the human race in allowing
family-life to be so unapproachable, so fortified, so secretive.
In spite of what he had often said to Gerda, it
came over him now that there <span class='it'>was</span> something rather
ghastly in letting this girl and this child be shut up with
this senile nympholept.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“From London, by the afternoon post,” insisted Mr.
Malakite. And Wolf, nervously receptive of every psychic
current just then, felt more uneasy still at this imbecile
repetition of so unimportant a detail.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Is it Lord Carfax you are talking about?” he hazarded—thinking
to himself, “How oddly that fellow
keeps up his rôle in my life!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But the bookseller nodded eagerly. “Did <span class='it'>you</span> write
to him too about my stuff?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie turned her head sharply at this. “I’ve never
told Wolf anything at all about your catalogue, Father,”
she cried. “He doesn’t approve of our selling”—she
hesitated a moment, and then smiled her most mischievous
smile—“the sort of books we <span class='it'>do</span> sell!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This identification of herself with the worst aspect of
her parent’s business was a new shock to Wolf. He looked
at her reproachfully; thinking of the nature of that book
from Paris compared with which the lewdest court-trials
in Dorset history were a mere pinch of honest dirt; but
the girl’s head was held high, and her eyes were flashing
ominously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“His lordship says he’ll take the whole lot!” concluded
her father triumphantly. “So <span class='it'>that</span> means, my
pretty ones, that your silly old man has done the best
stroke of business of his whole life!” He turned his eye
defiantly upon Wolf as he spoke, as if challenging the
whole world to interfere with him. “I shall be able to
retire from work after this,” he added, with an unpleasant
complacency, “and we’ll go and live at Weymouth,
won’t we, my treasures? The silly old man will sit on
the esplanade all the morning, and play bowls all the
afternoon!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie got up at this point and moved round to the
little girl’s elbow. While she was spreading a slice of
bread for her, Wolf muttered something about goat-carriages.
The child was all attention at once.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did Cinderella’s coach have goats to pull it?” she
asked. “Do goats go faster than donkeys?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll just run down and see if I can see anything of
your fly,” said Christie suddenly. And she slipped from
the room with a movement as swift, and almost as imperceptible,
as a breath of that day’s soft wind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The old man took advantage of her absence to begin
retailing to Darnley the names, editions, and prices of
some of his most curious and expensive volumes. Olwen,
at this, left her bread-and-jam, slipped out of her chair,
and, coming round to Wolf’s side, scrambled up upon his
knees and demanded a story.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf felt sure that, in spite of her ranging herself so
definitely on her father’s side, Christie was embarrassed
by the old man’s excitement; and he had an inkling
that she would remain down there in the doorway, looking
for the carriage, until it actually drew up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, sweetheart,” he whispered, “I’m not very good
at stories; but I’ll try.” He clasped the child closely to
him and shut his eyes so as to collect his thoughts.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“At the very moment,” he began, “when we were all
waiting for the cab to come, you and I saw an enormous
swallow .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the ancestor of all swallows .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. big as a
golden eagle, hovering close to the window.” Olwen
twisted round her head at this, in order to see the window.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Without a moment’s hesitation,” he went on, “we
opened the window together and got on the bird’s back.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Leaving everyone, Wolf?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Certainly. Leaving everyone! This great swallow carried
us then over Poll’s Camp and over the Gwent Lanes
toward Cadbury Camp. It let us get down off its back
at Cadbury Camp .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. which really is Camelot .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
and you and I drank at Arthur’s Well there; and the
effect of drinking that water was to turn us both into
swallows, or into some strange birds like swallows. We
sat, all three, in a row, on a sycamore-branch above the
valley; and we wondered and wondered where we’d fly
to. And a lovely wind, blowing over the dark rain that
is held in the hollows of old trees, ruffled our feathers;
and we knew, being birds, the language of the wind;
and it said to us, ‘The cuckoo-flowers have come out down
by the Lunt!’ And it said to us, ‘If you stop chattering,
you silly birds, and listen, you will hear the earth
murmuring to itself as it sweeps forward through
space.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What did I say to it then, Wolf?” whispered the
little girl, glancing anxiously at the door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But he continued to hug her closely to him; and with
his eyes still tightly shut, he went on in the same low
tone: “You said to it, ‘Blow us all towards Weymouth,
wind, and be quick about it. I want to dig in the
sand!’ ” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Wolf!” It was Darnley who was addressing him
across the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He opened his eyes, and, as he did so, he became aware
that his friend was looking at him with that same appealing
glance that had arrested his attention when they
first met at the Lovelace Hotel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Yes, Darnley?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mr. Malakite was alluding to your father just now;
and it just occurred to me that I’ve never told you what
<span class='it'>my</span> father used to say when I had to go back to school.
He used to say to me, ‘Man can bear anything, if it only
lasts a second!’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Something behind his friend’s mackerel-coloured eyes
seemed at that moment of time to be reaching out to his
inmost soul and crying to it for some answering signal.
The fact that Mattie only yesterday had called upon her
mother, so long dead, and that Darnley was now reverting
to a father he had never even mentioned before,
struck Wolf’s mind as an ominous glimpse into the
central nerve of life upon earth. He felt at that moment
an out-rushing wave of intense affection for Darnley.
But what could he do? Olwen refused to let him so
much as even smile at the yellow beard across the table.
She turned his head towards her with one of her sticky
little hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What did the wind say then?” she cried. “What did
it say to me when I told it to blow me to Weymouth?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It said, ‘You want too much!’ ” he went on. “It
said, ‘I’m afraid you’re not a real bird at all! If you were
a real bird you wouldn’t care what you did or where you
went, as long as you were flying. You’d hover over
Dorset, looking at everything—looking at every cuckoo-flower
in the Lunt fields, and every nest in the Gwent
Lanes. You’d hover——’”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Where is Christie?” came the voice of Mr. Malakite
from across the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had to reopen his closed eyes at this. “Downstairs,
I suppose,” he responded brusquely. And then,
catching hold of the child’s hot hand as it clutched at his
chin, “The wind,” he went on, “lifted all three birds
from off the branch and carried them northeast, where not
one of them wanted to go! Over hill and dale it carried
them, towards Stonehenge. And when it had let them sink
down upon the highest stone of Stonehenge, it said to
them——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was interrupted by Christie’s reappearance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The fly’s here, Darnley!” she cried. “Come, Olwen;
let me put on your things.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It said to them,” Wolf concluded, “I can only take
one of you to the house of my father. You must decide
among yourselves which it is to be!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a general hush in the room as these words
fell.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t let it be me!” whispered Olwen hurriedly,
clapping her hand over his mouth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf’s half-muffled voice must have been audible
to them all.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ‘Let the one who can best bear to be alone, be the
one to go,’ cried the swallow. And as he spoke, he
snatched up the trembling Olwen-bird with his beak and
claws, and spread his great, pointed wings for flight.
Over Wilton he flew, over Semley, over Gillingham,
over Templecombe, over Ramsgard, over King’s Barton!
And as he flew, the Olwen-bird’s feathers were so ruffled
by the speed, that she turned into a little girl again;
and when he set her down at last on the window-sill, and
she clambered back into the room, and called down the
stairs to Christie and Darnley, it seemed as if she had
never been out of the house at all.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was almost embarrassed by the grave hush that
followed his conclusion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Heavens! I didn’t know you were such a story-teller,”
murmured Darnley, as he picked up his overcoat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did the wind take you to its house?” panted Olwen,
flushed and fidgeting now, as Christie buttoned round
her a grey-blue jacket with a rabbit-fur collar and proceeded
to smooth down her hair under a small, stiff
Russian cap; “and did you <span class='it'>like</span> being taken away from
everybody, Wolf?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He made no answer to the child’s question. A deadly
sadness had suddenly descended upon him; and through
this sadness, as if through a screen of Mukalog’s most disastrous
rain, he fancied he caught an odiously possessive
look shot forth upon Christie’s bending figure out of the
old man’s narrowed eyelids.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A few minutes later, as the faded vehicle drove off,
with Olwen’s thin little arm protruded from its side, like
a white stalk out of a black bag, and he turned to Christie
in the doorway to bid her good-night, he found an expression
upon her face that sent a queer shiver through
his nerves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must go, Wolf dear,” she whispered. “Don’t forget
all about me in the excitement of tomorrow.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They remained silent for a second, side by side, as if
the physical chemistry of their two frames had its own
occult understanding, beyond anything that could be
said or done by either. Then she hurriedly touched his
hand, turned from him, and entered the house without
another sign.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For some mysterious physical reason, the familiar
sour smell of the pigsty, when he finally reached Preston
Lane, brought to his mind that incredibly beautiful
look, of sheer, native goodness, on the face of Gaffer
Barge.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That look had surged up from the depths to greet him
when he was in his worst danger of being swamped by
“reality.” Gaffer Barge was certainly too unimaginative
to blow any ideal bubble! Not even that old rascal with
the white cat was more embedded in actuality than was
this generous lout.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf paused for a moment and ran the end of his stick
along the railing of the pigsty as an unmusical man might
draw his thumb across the strings of a violin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He crossed the road and opened the gate into his puny
garden. To his surprise, as he moved up to the door, he
saw that their front-room was brilliantly illuminated.
Hurriedly he let himself in; and he was no sooner in the
hall than he was aware of youthful laughter proceeding
from the parlour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He burst in upon them, his hat and stick still in his
hand. But it was only Lobbie Torp and Gerda, engaged
in a vociferous game of cards!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda’s cheeks were burning and her eyes were brilliant.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Lobbie’s brought us a real pack, Wolf!” she cried
excitedly. “They’ve got pictures on ’em, same as they
have at Farmer’s Rest!” shouted Lobbie in an ecstasy,
pushing a card into Wolf’s hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Why haven’t we ever thought of buying such nice
ones, Wolf?” echoed Gerda.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“A pretty sort of game for a schoolboy to bring into
my sober house,” began Wolf smiling; “but you two are
certainly enjoying yourselves.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, we must stop now,” said Gerda, in her most
grave housekeeping tone. “I’ve got to get supper. He
can stay to supper, can’t he, Wolf?” she added, throwing
into her voice a cajoling little-girl inflexion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Oh, don’t let’s stop, Gerdie! Don’t let’s stop!” cried
Lob Torp. “Why can’t we take sides again, with him
joining in?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Wolf’s presence had already produced a certain
restraint; and Gerda did not find it difficult to slip
away into the kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf took off his coat, and, throwing it upon a chair,
flung his hat and stick on top of it. He noted in his
mind that this was the first time he had ever dispensed
with his habitual hanging-up of these objects upon the
pegs outside.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He lifted the table out of the way, and the two of
them sat down by the fire. A couple of cards on the floor
made Wolf recall, as he stooped to pick them up, that
game of draughts he had intruded upon between Gerda
and Bob Weevil.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How’s your friend Weevil?” he asked Lobbie at
random.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Pining for Gerdie,” was the boy’s startling answer.
“I went long o’ he to Willum’s Mill last Tuesday night
when Mr. Manley were out courtin’; but he were too
lonesome to put a worm on a hook! He said Gerdie
never liked they wriggling worms and he weren’t never
going to disturb they again. He said he reckoned them
had <span class='it'>their</span> feelings, same as other folk. I told ’e ’twere
all a girl’s foolishness, and that we were men; but he
said he had sworn a girt oath to do everythink what
our Gerdie wanted, though he reckoned he’d never set
eyes on she again.” Lobbie paused, and, feeling about
in his pocket, produced a packet of peppermints, one of
which he put in his mouth and another he handed to
Wolf, who accepted it gravely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He made a vow,” the boy repeated, staring solemnly
into the fire, as if completely weighed down by the
strange aberrations of human passion; “a vow like what
King Harold did make, on they unknown bones.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Have you seen him since, Lobbie?” enquired Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The boy hesitated and glanced rather uneasily at his
host.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tisn’t that I haven’t seen him,” he murmured obscurely.
“If you <span class='it'>must</span> know,” he burst out, “ ’twas when
I asked he to come to Grassy Mound, out Henchford
way, where the girls do enjoy theyselves, rolling down
thik bank. And do ’ee know what he said to I?” Lobbie
fixed a portentously dramatic look upon his hearer, the
undissolved peppermint in his cheek increasing rather
than diminishing its impressiveness. “He said there
weren’t no pleasure in ’em! ’Twas upsetting to a person
to hear him; but that’s what he said .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ‘no pleasure
in ’em’ .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. meaning, <span class='it'>you know what</span>!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your friend is in love with our Gerda, I’m afraid,”
said Wolf coldly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ’Tisn’t Adultery, be it,” enquired Lobbie, “for he
to carry on so about another man’s wife?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>In place of answering this question, Wolf escorted
his brother-in-law into the kitchen. There the boy’s youthful
spirits, as he helped his sister dish up the supper,
left Wolf time to slip out into the yard and possess his
“soul,” such as it was, in five minute’s solitude.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Actuated by one of those capricious motions which
he habitually obeyed, he moved over to the stunted
laburnum-bush by the wall. On one branch only were
there any buds; whereas their neighbour’s lilac, growing
in the pig-man’s back-yard, was covered with embryo
leaves. He laid his hand on the trunk of this
abject tree and looked up at the great velvet-black concavity
above him, sprinkled with its minute points of
light.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was then that he distinctly heard, just as if the
trunk of that little tree were a telegraphic receiver,
“Wolf! Wolf! Wolf!” uttered in Christie’s voice, but
with an intonation twisted out of her normal accent by
some desperate necessity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he heard these words he seemed to see her face,
exactly as he had seen it at that open doorway a couple
of hours ago, only with a look upon it that forced him
to make an immediate drastic decision.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He went back into the kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come on, Wolf!” cried Gerda, “we are ready to
begin.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not for one single second did he doubt the truth of
what he had heard under that tree. “I must get away
without upsetting them,” he thought. “I must get away
without their guessing that anything’s wrong!” He nodded
his head with a forced grimace.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sit down and start, my dear! I’ve got to run out
for a minute to get something.” By the light of the
parlour-fire he pulled on his overcoat. His fingers shook
so much, as he tightened the collar round his neck, that
it was not easy to button it. Then he went into the
kitchen again. The brother and sister were seated at
the table now, laughing and jesting with absorbed hilarity.
“There’s something important I <span class='it'>have</span> to get,
Gerda! Keep my plate hot for me, will you? And enjoy
yourselves till I come back. Don’t wait dessert for
me! But I’ll come back all right .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. before long.”
Throwing these words among them in a voice full of
exaggerated cheerfulness, he snatched at his stick and
was out of the house before they had time to realize
what he was doing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Like a stage-group in a charade, just glimpsed by
some hurried messenger through an open doorway, as he
rushes on his way, those two laughing faces at the table
lined themselves against his agitation. He even retained
enough detachment, as he strode along, to note how
easily these children of Dorset made a natural circle
for their festivity, from which he was inevitably excluded.
Still there arose no flicker of doubt in his mind
as to the truth of the summons he had received. It
tugged at him so hard that before he reached the book-shop
he was actually running.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>God! There was a man talking to Christie at her
door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He approached them breathless, his heart beating
violently. He felt the complete confusion which a person
feels when he sees some utterly alien object in possession
of a familiar spot!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The stranger was talking in authoritative tones to
Christie, who herself stood exactly as he had seen her
last.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll be back in a couple of hours,” the man was
saying. “But if he <span class='it'>should</span> regain consciousness before
that, you must let me know. You’ve got someone to send,
haven’t you?” He remained for a moment hesitating,
his bowler-hat in one hand and his black bag in the
other. His countenance was illuminated by a faint flicker
from behind the form of the girl. She must have laid
down her candle upon a step of the staircase.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The first impression Wolf received was of an old
photograph-album in his grandmother’s drawing-room
in Brunswick Terrace; the second, one of a certain
hospital-entrance in a street in London. It was later that
these impressions explained themselves. The man had
the drooping mustache and unintelligent wooden forehead
of an old-fashioned army-officer. About his person
hung a smell of laudanum or chloroform.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What is it?” cried Wolf as he approached. “Can I
help? Can I do anything?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Dark as it was, Wolf was conscious that the fellow
gave him a look of frigid suspicion as he bowed himself
off. “You can send for me if anything—otherwise
in a couple of hours,” were his final words as he moved
away.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie led him then up the well-known staircase.
“He is dying,” she said, as they entered the bedroom
of Mr. Malakite, a room whose existence was barely
known to him. Then there commenced a strange vigil
beside the unconscious form of that old man.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Christie herself sat on a chair on the left of her
father’s bed; he, on a similar one on the right. In broken
whispers the girl told him how her father had fallen
backwards, down that narrow staircase, soon after he
and she had been left alone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I think I lost my head, Wolf. I think I ran crying
into the street. Anyway, people came round .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a lot
of people .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and they fetched Doctor Percy. Father’s
been like this ever since. Doctor Percy examined him.
It’s some internal injury, he thinks. He says he
thinks his spine is hurt in some way; but the worst injury
is internal. He thinks”—here the girl spoke in a
voice that startled Wolf a good deal more than the
meaning of her words—“that he’s bleeding to death inside.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Each five minutes that passed in this singular interlude
seemed as long as twenty minutes of any ordinary
time-flow. Christie was completely different from her
ordinary self. She avoided Wolf’s eyes. She repelled his
touch. She seemed reluctant to resume anything approaching
their old intimacy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He longed to ask her whether she had actually called
out his name aloud, or whether that psychic summoning
had conveyed its message independently of either of
their two conscious minds. But he was too troubled by
this unusual look upon her face and this unnatural reserve,
to ask any questions. He longed to enquire how
the old man had come to have such an accident at all;
but he dared not refer to it. There emanated from the
girl an ice-cold barrier of inflexible pride, setting him
at such a distance that no real exchange of feelings was
possible.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Every now and then she would get up and move the
bedclothes under the old man’s chin, as if fearful lest
he should be suffocated. But the particular way she
did this struck Wolf as having something unnatural in
it, for she did it exactly as if the old man were already
dead. She touched him differently from the way she
would have done it had he merely been unconscious. Her
attitude seemed to display the shrinking abhorrence that
living people experience at contact with inanimate flesh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>To Wolf, who was both ignorant and very unobservant
in matters of this sort, it did begin to present itself at
last, as he watched the old man’s face, that he really
was dead .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. had died, in fact, while Christie and he
had been watching over him! Incontinently he muttered
something to Christie, and, bending over the bed, inserted
his hand beneath the clothes and felt for the old man’s
heart. What he actually said to Christie was, “I’ll find
his heart, shall I?” But in all the agitation of that moment
he was still shockingly aware of the girl’s avoidance
of his eye.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I can’t feel it. I don’t believe he’s breathing!” he
blurted out. “Look at his lips!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl did not answer him. She bent low down
over her father’s face; so low, that a loose tress of her
hair fell against the old man’s closed eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then she straightened herself up with a jerk, and
Wolf pulled his hand away from under the bedclothes.
He felt inert, utterly unable to deal with this crisis.
Stupidly he watched her across the old man’s stiff figure.
He had been by degrees noting the aspects of this room
which was so completely strange to him. <span class='it'>Mr. Malakite’s
bedroom!</span> He had even permitted himself to wonder
what kind of spiritual “eidola” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the creation of the
thoughts of this singular old man .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. lived and moved,
like invisible homunculi, in this bare room! For the
room was absolutely bare. With the exception of a small
framed picture, in staring colours, of Raphael’s <span class='it'>Transfiguration</span>,
propped up upon the mantelpiece, there was
nothing upon the walls. The only thing to be seen in the
room now was death—death upon the bed, and the
daughter of death standing at the window!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Malakite’s bedroom-lamp was of a very different
appearance from that old green one in Christie’s room.
It was a small ship’s-lantern; and her father was wont
to read deep into the night, so Christie had once told
him, with this lantern balanced upon his knees as he
lay in bed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The ship’s-lantern did not throw a very strong light;
and Wolf, as he laid his fingers on the old man’s forehead,
with a vague notion of establishing the fact of
life’s extinction, was aware of Christie’s figure at the
window as a taut bow-string of quivering feeling.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He does not breathe. It must be the end, Chris,” he
murmured gently.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The girl turned abruptly and came back. Twice, as
she crossed that little space between the window and the
bed, he saw her straighten herself up, hold back her
head, and shut her eyes, clenching her fingers tightly as
she did so, and making an odd little indrawn gasp, as if
she were swallowing the very dregs of all human bitterness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Shall I go and fetch Doctor Percy?” he asked, moving
round the foot of the bed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He caught her eye for a moment then, and it was like
the eye of a wild bird imprisoned in a boy’s hand.
She huddled herself against the wall at the bed’s head,
her head bowed upon her folded arms, her body as rigid
as the form on the bed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Something about the nape of her small neck, as she
hung there, with drooping head and tense, taut limbs,
hit Wolf through the heart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t you mind, O my dear true-love! Don’t you
mind!” he whispered desperately, clasping and unclasping
his fingers, but not daring to approach her. His
consciousness of her mood was so intense that when he
thought of trying to take her in his arms he saw her
wild white face and flashing eyes turned upon him—turned
against him with terrible words!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you want me to go for that doctor, Chris?” he
repeated, in a dull, flat, wooden voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A long shiver passed through her body, and she
turned round, her arms hanging limp by her sides.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. rather go .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. myself,” she said, in a low,
heavy tone. “Go .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. myself,” she repeated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>With stiff, leaden movements, after that, she went into
her own room and came back in her loose winter coat
and woollen cap.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O Chris!” he cried, as he saw her there, hovering
in the doorway; “O little Chris!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But she made a movement with her hands, as he approached
her, that was almost peevish—the sort of
movement with which a little girl beats down the jumping
and barking of an excited dog.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll be back in about twenty minutes, Wolf,” she
said calmly. But he noticed that not one glance did she
cast at the form on the bed, not one glance at him. The
words she uttered, natural and commonplace as they
were, were addressed to that gaudy rendering of the
<span class='it'>Transfiguration</span> on the mantelpiece.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then she was gone .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. melting away, so it
seemed to him, as if she had actually been a spirit. The
sound of the opening and closing of the street-door affected
him like an everlasting farewell. He recognized
in that second that something had happened in his own
heart that was like a wall falling outwards .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. outwards
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. into an unknown dimension.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In addition to the bookseller’s ship’s-lantern, which
stood on a small table, there were two candles on the
bare chest of drawers, one on each side of a faded leather
case, containing two hair-brushes. Wolf sat down again
and watched his own shadow sway, with the flicker of
those two candle-flames, across the countenance upon the
bed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Very faintly, from the parlour on the other side of
the landing—for the door was still wide open—came the
ticking of Christie’s clock.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His consciousness, like the man at watch on a ship
that has been submerged in some terrific wave and
rises to the surface cloudy with salt-foam, turned instinctively
to his lost “mythology,” turned to it as to something
lying dead on the floor of his soul. And it came
over him, by slow degrees like a cold glimmer of morning
upon a tossing sea, that the abiding continuity of his
days lay, after all, in his body, in his skull, in his spine,
in his legs, in his clutching anthropoid-ape arms! Yes!
that was all he had left .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. his vegetable-animal identity,
isolated, solitary .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. hovered over by the margins
of strange thoughts!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The intense reality of Mr. Malakite’s figure beneath
those bedclothes, of his beard above them, of his nostrils,
his old-man’s eyelids, his ugly beast-ears, narrowed
the reality of his own life, with its gathered memories,
into something as concrete, tangible, compact, as the
bony knuckles of his own gaunt hands now resting upon
his protruding knees! Thought? It was “thought,” of
course! But not thought in the abstract. It was the
thought of a tree, of a snake, of an ox, of a man, a man
begotten, a man conceived, a man like enough to die tomorrow!
With what within him had he felt that shrewd
thrust just now about his true-love Chris? Not with any
“glassy essence.” Simply with his vegetable-animal integrity,
<span class='it'>with his life</span>, as a tree would feel the loss of
its companion .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. as a beast the loss of its mate!</p>

<p class='pindent'>His thoughts focussed themselves mechanically upon
the white lips of the man on the bed and upon his
wrinkled eyelids, but they were no longer occupied with
these things. His mind reviewed the loss of his life-illusion.
How many chances and casualties, how many
little criss-cross patterns, puffs of aimless air, wandering
shadows, unpredictable wind-ripples, had combined
to disintegrate and destroy it!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must not let slip what I found out just now,” he
thought. And then, as a triangle of tiny wrinkles upon
one of Mr. Malakite’s closed eyes wove itself into his
mental process, “Whatever,” he said to himself, “Christie
may feel, I know that she, and no other, is my real
true-love! Yes, by God! And I know that my ‘I am I’ is
no ‘hard, small crystal’ inside me, but a cloud, a vapour,
a mist, a smoke, hovering round my skull, hovering round
my spine, my arms, my legs! <span class='it'>That’s what I am</span>—a ‘vegetable-animal’
wrapped in a mental cloud, and with the
will-power to project this cloud into the consciousness of
others!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he articulated this thought he gave himself
up to a vivid awareness of his body, <span class='it'>particularly of his
hands and knees</span>, and, with this, to a vivid awareness
of his mind as a cloudy projection, unimpeded by
material obstacles, driven forth in pursuit of Christie.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I command that she shall be all right!” he muttered
audibly, addressing this word to the universe in general.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All these thoughts raced through his head while, for
no earthly reason, he transferred his gaze to the bookseller’s
eyelashes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But if I send my mind after her, where is the will
that sends it? In my hands and my knees?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But with the help of Mr. Malakite’s eyelashes, which
were of a yellowish white, he decided to suppress all
those logical ambiguities. “The great thing is to have a
<span class='it'>feeling</span> of my identity that I can strengthen, whatever
happens! Perhaps my will is in my knees and my hands.
It doesn’t matter <span class='it'>where</span> it is, as long as it can drive forth
my mind to look after Christie!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>At that point he was aware of a cold, sickening doubt
with regard to Christie. Strange that he should only
discover what love for her meant, at the moment when
that closing door rang in his ears!</p>

<p class='pindent'>What a childish optimist he was! Were gorillas like
that? <span class='it'>Their</span> identity, anyhow, was in their hands and
knees!</p>

<p class='pindent'>A middle-aged gorilla, watching the dead face of an
old gorilla—such was his present situation.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly the left eye of Mr. Malakite—the one upon
which Wolf’s gaze had so mechanically been fixed—opened
perceptibly and looked at him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’ll be back soon, Solent,” said Mr. Malakite.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you want anything? Can I do anything for you?
Are you suffering, sir?” Wolf found himself on his
knees at the side of this awakened eye. The lid kept
flickering up and down, raising itself with difficulty and
then closing again; but the amount of conscious intelligence
revealed by that life-cranny when Wolf was able
to peer into it, was terrifying.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She pushed me down,” said Mr. Malakite.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A preposterous nursery-rhyme about an old man “who
wouldn’t say his prayers” came into Wolf’s head. But
he murmured gravely, “Can I get you a drink of water
or anything?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Your father.” These two words came very faintly.
The flickering eyelid sank down and stirred no more.
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. “I think I see your father.” This time the voice
was almost inaudible. But the next word was clearer.
“Good,” said Mr. Malakite.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had risen from his knees now and was hanging
over the dying man, his face a few inches from his
face, his hands, palms-down, pressed into his pillow.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And great.” These last two syllables seemed uttered
rather by the old man’s spirit than by his lips; for
the latter were closed as tightly as his eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. will .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. for——” The sound of this
ghastly susurration seemed to come from under the
bedclothes, from under the bed, from under the floor,
from under the book-shop beneath the floor, from under
the clay-bottom of Blacksod.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“For——” The repetition of the syllable seemed like
the echo of an echo; but Wolf became aware of a
shocking twitching in the muscles of the old man’s
face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“For——” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A wave of atavistic sentiment rose up in Wolf’s throat
from countless centuries of Christian unction. He found
the word “forgive” quivering on the tip of his tongue,
and recklessly he let it descend, like a drop of consecrated
oil, on the man’s dying. His idea was that Mr.
Malakite was confusing the one person he had ever respected
with some obscure First Cause. Then he found
himself staggering back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>With a convulsion of his whole frame, the bookseller
jerked himself to a sitting-posture. Spasmodically
drawing in his legs, like a frog swimming on its back,
he kicked off every shred of clothing.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Forget!” he shrieked; and his voice resembled the
tearing of a strip of calico. He was dead when he sank
back; and from one of the corners of his mouth a stream
of saliva, tinged with a red stain, trickled upon the
pillow.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hurriedly Wolf pressed down those elevated knees
and pulled the bedclothes up to the man’s chin. Then,
taking out his handkerchief, he wiped the mouth with
it, screwed it into a tight ball and wedged it between
the blankets and the jaw of the dead. That done, he
drew a long breath and stared at Mr. Malakite. But
where <span class='it'>was</span> Mr. Malakite? The face above the stained
handkerchief seemed a <span class='it'>new phenomenon</span> in the world—something
that had no connection with the old man he
had heard crying the word “forget” just now. It was
as if the thing he had known in his experience as Mr.
Malakite had completely vanished; and <span class='it'>from somewhere
else</span> had arisen this frozen simulacrum.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Forget,” he murmured to himself; and then he felt
a longing to convey at once to Miss Gault the news that
a man upon his death-bed had confused William Solent
with God!</p>

<p class='pindent'>But at the image of Miss Gault, tumbling over her
milk-bottle upon his father’s grave, a sudden moisture
seemed to flow into the cavities behind his eyeballs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s not for you,” he said grimly to the figure on
the bed, as he recognized this tendency to tears. “It’s
for Miss Gault.” And actuated by a queer desire <span class='it'>to
prove to the corpse</span> that it was not “for him,” he laid
the tips of his fingers on the bookseller’s forehead. “How
soon do they get cold?” he said to himself.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At this point he heard the door opening down below,
and the sound of voices and footsteps. He hurried out
of the room and met Christie on the stairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s dead, Chris,” he said. “I couldn’t do anything.”
This addition to his news sounded singularly foolish as
soon as it was uttered. Even at that inadvertent moment,
on the eighth step of those back-stairs, he blushed to have
spoken such a banality.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s too late, doctor,” said she, turning her head towards
the man behind her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I feared so,” said Doctor Percy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Poor old gentleman!” repeated Doctor Percy. “He
is spared a great deal.” The tone in which this amiable
epitaph echoed through that house and penetrated into
the shop, with its shelves of perverse erudition, had an
irritating effect upon Wolf’s nerves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt a malicious desire, as he moved aside to let
Christie pass, to catch the man by the sleeve of his
neat coat and whisper in his ear something monstrous.
“She had to throw him downstairs, you idiot; she had to
throw him downstairs!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Malakite’s daughter was standing by his bed’s
head when the two men entered the room. Her arms,
with the fingers clasped desperately inside the palms,
hung down by her sides like torn tree-limbs in a deadly
wind. Her head drooped upon her chest. He fancied for
a moment that her profile was contorted with crying; but
when she raised her head, her brown eyes were dull, abstracted,
and completely tearless.</p>

<p class='pindent'>After bustling about the body for a minute or two,
as if professional nicety required more evidence of
death than nature in decency could afford, Doctor Percy
bowed himself off.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come into the other room, Chris! No! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Come
along! You <span class='it'>must</span>, my darling.” Holding her by one of
her clenched hands .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and she obeyed him like a
somnambulist .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. he led her into her parlour, where
he made her sit down on a chair, over the glowing heap
of cinders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He sat down close to her side; and without looking
at her, but still holding tightly that small clenched
hand, he began speaking rapidly, emphatically, monotonously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Chris, there’s nothing about all this that I don’t
know <span class='it'>as well as you do</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. nothing, my darling! It’s
as if some crust were shattered for a moment and we
looked through .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. into those horrors that are always
there! It’s the same with us all, Chris! It’s the same with
the whole world. There’s only one thing for us to do if
we’re to endure life at all, Chris; and .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and your
father said the word himself before he died. Are you
listening, Chris? He became conscious for a minute;
and he said it to me like a message for you.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. O Chris,
little Chris, it was a message to both of us!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>She did not lift her head; but he knew, from the
quiver in the fingers he held, that her attention was
arrested.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He said ‘forget,’ Chris .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. just that one word. O
my love, my only love! From now on that is the word
for us. We know what we know. We bear it together.
Listen, little Chris! You’ve got to go on living, for
Olwen’s sake. I’ve got to go on living for Gerda’s sake.
When you went away just now, I knew, in one great
flash, what you and I are to each other. We shall be
<span class='it'>that</span>, my dear, dear love, till we both are dead! Nothing
can change it any more. Nothing can come between
us any more. As to everything else .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. are you listening,
little Chris? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. we’ve both got to ‘forget’—just
as he said. It’s the only way, my precious. When that
crust breaks, as it did just now, it’s madness to dwell
upon it. It’s the unbearable. No one can bear it and
go on living. And you’ve <span class='it'>got</span> to live, Chris, for Olwen’s
sake, just as I’ve got——”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was interrupted in the middle of his speech. The
daughter of Mr. Malakite sprang erect upon her feet
and uttered a piercing scream. Then she beat the air
with her clenched hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Damn you!” she cried. “Damn you! You talking
fool! You great, stupid, talking fool! What do <span class='it'>you</span>
know of me or my father? What do <span class='it'>you</span> know of my
real life?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf drew away from her, his body bent forwards,
his hands pressed against the pit of his stomach, his
eyes blinking.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For a second he saw himself and his useless words
exactly as she described them. He saw all his explanations
as if they had been one prolonged windy bellow,
covering the impervious grazing of a complacent ox!</p>

<p class='pindent'>But grim terror swallowed up this spasm of personal
humiliation. What if this tragedy were to unsettle Christie’s
wits?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He used his will now as if it had been a master
mariner, giving rapid, desperate orders in a deafening
storm! He deliberately smoothed out of his face every
shade of feeling except a thundering anger.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Stop that!” he cried, as if he had been speaking to
Olwen. “Stop that, Christie!” And he made a step towards
her. She had never seen him in such a mood, never
heard such a tone from him. His nervous concern gave
vibrancy to his pretended anger. Her contorted features
relaxed, her clenched hands dropped down; she stood
there before him like a solitary pier-post—desolate but
unbroken—about whose endurance the last waves of
the storm subsided in foamy rings.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then, to his infinite relief, she burst into a flood of
tears. He never afterwards forgot the extremity of those
tears. Her face seemed literally to dissolve; it seemed
to melt, as if the very stuff of it were changing from
moulded flesh into streaming water!</p>

<p class='pindent'>She flung herself down on the sofa and buried her
head in its faded embroidered roses. Approaching the
back of the sofa, and leaning against it, he watched her
huddled form lying on its bed of relief, very much as
a master showman might watch the performance of a
darling puppet, over whose form and gesture he had
worked in secret, by the light of an attic candle, for
many a long, starved month!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The lamp Christie always kept on the sewing-table
in her parlour must have been burning steadily ever
since they had had tea. The chimney was black now with
soot; and Wolf moved across and turned the wick down
a little. As he performed this small action, he received,
to his astonishment, an inrush of furtive, stealthy satisfaction.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was the first of such feelings that he had enjoyed
for many a long day. “<span class='it'>Mr. Malakite is dead.</span>” Was it
<span class='it'>that</span> particular collocation of words, as his mind visualized
them, that gave him this physical thrill of relief?
Or was it just the change of the girl’s mood?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He could see, even by that diminished lamplight,
when he returned to the sofa, that her streaming tears
had made a dark, wet stain upon that pink embroidery.
Oh, she would be all right now! Whatever had passed
between her and the old man—whatever plague-spot of
unspeakable remorse had appeared upon some sensitive
fibre in her consciousness—these tears would wash out
everything!</p>

<p class='pindent'>How could there be so much salt-water in one tiny
skull?</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tears of women! How from the beginning of time
they had washed away every kind of evil thing, every
kind of deviltry! Down the centuries had flowed those
tears, clearing our race’s conscience from poisons, washing
clean the mind of man from the torture of rational
logic, washing it clean from the torture of memory, recreating
it, fresh, careless, free, like a child new-sprung
from the womb! But how could such a wide, dark, wet
stain upon those pink roses have come from so small a
skull!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He didn’t dare to speak to her as he pressed his hands
upon the back of that familiar sofa and stared across her
form, curved there like a dusky tree-root, into the dying
fire.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As had happened once or twice before to him in his
life, he fell at this crisis into a kind of waking-trance.
That flood of tears became a river, swifter, deeper than
the Lunt, and on its breast he was carried, so it seemed
to him, into an imaginary landscape, far enough away
from the corpse of Mr. Malakite and his ambiguous
books! It was that same landscape which the Gainsborough
picture had conjured up. But instead of a road
there was this river; and the river carried him beyond
the terraces and the gardens into less human scenery.
There, between high, dark, slippery precipices was he
carried, by the water of Christie’s weeping; and there
he encountered in strange correspondency those same
towering basaltic cliffs past which he had drifted in a
similar hallucination nearly a year ago, as he waited
for his mother’s train on the “Slopes” of Ramsgard!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was brought back from this drugged condition by
the sound of the street-door bell; but it was not at once
that he realized that he was the one who had to answer
this summons! Staring at the curve of Christie’s wet
eyelashes on her drowned cheek, as that dark stain on
the pink roses grew wider, he was startled by the idea
that this particular grouping of material substances
might be no more than reflections in a mirror. There, below
this girl’s figure, below these darkened roses, was
there not hidden some deep, spiritual transaction? The
feeling passed away quickly enough; but as it passed,
it left behind it a stabbing, quivering <span class='it'>suspicion</span>, a suspicion
as to the solid reality of what his senses were
thus representing, compared with something else, something
of far greater moment, both for himself and for
her!</p>

<p class='pindent'>All this while the street-door bell continued to
ring; and it was ringing now with violent, spasmodic
jerks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He straightened his back, and, moving away from
the sofa, stood motionless in the middle of the room,
listening.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I must go down,” he thought. “It’s most likely that
doctor come back, to make sure once more that the old
man’s dead!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Again the bell rang, this time with a long, continuous,
jerking pull.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf glanced at the back of the sofa. There was no
movement there, nor any sign. He went out on the landing
and waited for a moment at the door of the dead
man’s room, which they had left wide open. How different
was the immobility of that form from the motionlessness
of the one he had just left!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He listened to the silence, waiting for the bell to
ring again. “Why is it,” he thought, “that I find it so
hard to go down?” He moved to the head of the stairs.
“Why do sounds like this,” he thought, “hit corpses in
the face and outrage them like an indecency? Does death
draw up to the surface some new kind of silence, to
disturb which is a monstrous abuse?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Brought back to reality by the cessation of the ringing,
and a little fearful as to what the doctor might do
if thwarted in his professional zeal, Wolf ran down the
stairs and flung open the street-door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There, in his Sunday clothes, and with an expression
of extravagant decorum upon his whimsical visage, was
Mr. John Torp!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Doctor told I, master——” he began.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come in, Mr. Torp,” said Wolf helplessly, wondering
vaguely what new process of pious science that
stark figure upstairs was to expect. “Come in and sit
down, will you, while I tell Miss Malakite you’re here?”
He let his father-in-law into the house and closed the
door. It was easier to tell Mr. Torp to sit down than
to give him anything to sit upon. “I don’t know,” he
began awkwardly. But Mr. Torp caught him by the
sleeve with one of his plump hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It came over I,” he whispered, “that Miss Malakite
wouldn’t be wanting one of they arrogant death-women
with her Dad. And as I were an undertaker meself afore
I took to me stone-job, I thought I’d run round and
help she out.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’m sure it’s most kind of you, Mr. Torp,” murmured
Wolf, noticing now for the first time that his
father-in-law was carrying a heavy carpet-bag. “I’ll go
up and tell Miss Malakite you’re here. I expect she’ll be
very grateful for your help.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Don’t ’ee say more than just that one word, Mister,”
replied the other, in a tone of such unctuous slyness that
Wolf made a grimace in the darkness. “Some relatives
do like to use a common sheet. But I do say ’tis the
corpse’s feelings what us have to reason with. These here
shrouds”—and he tapped Wolf’s knee with the carpet-bag—“be
calculated to lie as soft and light on they,
as lamb’s-wool on babes. ’Twas one of these here
shrouds that thik bull-frog Manley cheated his wone
mother of, by his dunghill ways; and her a woman too
what always had a finicky skin. But don’t ’ee say more
than just that one word, mister. Missy up there, ’tis only
likely enough, will give no more attention to these here
shrouds than if she were tucking her Dad in’s bed. But
‘Leave it to Torp’ is what thik corpse would say, were
speech allowed ’un. They be wonderful touchy, they
corpses be, if all were told; and it be worse when folks’
tongues run sharp upon ’un, as we know they do on he
above-stairs. ’Twere me thoughts of <span class='it'>that</span>, mister, that
made I reckon Miss Malakite would be glad to see I,
sooner than they death-nurses, who be all such tittle-tattlers.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It had by this time begun to dawn upon Wolf that his
eccentric father-in-law had been genuinely actuated by
a philanthropic impulse in making his appearance at this
juncture. With this in mind he caught the man’s hand
and shook it warmly. “I’m sure we’re much obliged to
you, Mr. Torp,” he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And don’t ’ee worry about your Gerdie,” concluded
the worthy man. “Missus went round to she when I
comed away. Our Lob runned in, ’sknow, with a tale of
your leaving your vittles and the Lord knows what!
So when doctor told I you was here, I let <span class='it'>she</span> go to
Gerdie, and came round here me wone self. Ye knew, I
reckon, that there were trouble in this house? Well
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. no matter for that! Every man to his wone concerns,
be <span class='it'>my</span> motto.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The rough tact of this little outburst of indulgent
interpretation was the final touch in the winning of
Wolf’s gratitude.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll go up and see Miss Malakite,” he said. “You wait
here, Mr. Torp. I’m sorry there are only the stairs to
sit on.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found Christie putting coal on the grate in the
parlour. She had closed the door of her father’s room.
She turned to him a face flushed by her struggle with the
fire, but bearing the impress of her desperate crying
in some fashion he could not just then define. At any
rate she appeared in full control of herself; and he
felt intuitively that as far as remorse went, her reason
was clear and unpoisoned.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He shut the parlour-door and hurriedly explained
Mr. Torp’s mission.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He knew I was with you. Doctor Percy must have
told him. He knew you’d want some undertaker’s woman
to do what’s necessary .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to ‘lay him out,’ as they
call it. He knew what gossips these demons are. So he
just came himself. It was nice of the old chap, wasn’t
it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The psychic tension between them, as he hurriedly
communicated all this, was so great that he found they
were both on the verge of a childish giggling-fit. Wolf
took advantage of this mood to tell her about the contents
of the carpet-bag. “Oh, Chris,” he found himself
saying, with a queer chuckle in his voice, “when the old
man used that particular word, I had such a weird
sensation! I thought of the shroud in which Samuel appeared
to Saul. I thought of the shroud in which Lazarus
came out of his grave. I thought of the shroud
that Flora MacIvor made for Fergus before he was executed.
And then to see that carpet-bag! It might have
been a monstrous thing, eh, Chris? Nobody but this old
fellow could have carried it off. Gad! but what a word
it is! A <span class='it'>shroud</span>! Doesn’t it make you want to be drowned
in water, Chrissie, or burnt into cinders?” He paused
for a minute, struggling to keep back from her one of
those forbidden thoughts to which he was so hopelessly
subject. But their mood was too close. They were like a
couple of excited starlings perched on a gallows that
sways in the wind.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The love that was between them
gave a mad gusto to that incongruous moment, with Mr.
Torp waiting below-stairs to wash an incestuous old man
with soap and water, and Christie’s parlour-door shut
for ever to Mr. Malakite!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Isn’t it awful, Chris,” he whispered, “to think of
what Redfern’s shroud must have looked like when
they——” He suddenly remembered that he had never
told the girl a word about what he and Valley had seen;
and he stopped abruptly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“When they?” she echoed faintly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll tell you another time, Chris,” he flung out; and
he seized her fragile figure in the most self-effacing
embrace he had ever bestowed on anyone since he was
born.</p>

<div><h1 id='chap25'>RIPENESS IS ALL</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll be sure to be back for tea!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>These words were uttered by Gerda as she stood in
their doorway, with Lobbie Torp at her side.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Make it fairly late, then,” said Wolf. “I don’t want
to cut short our walk.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The best part of our walk will be looking forward
to our return,” remarked Wolf’s companion, with a smile
that Wolf saw reflected, as if it were a bunch of honeysuckle,
in Gerda’s delighted face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I’ll have tea ready for <span class='it'>you</span>, whether Wolf’s
home or not!” cried the excited girl.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“And I’ll get back from <span class='it'>my</span> walk as soon as you
do,” threw in Lobbie Torp. “I’m going down by the
Lunt to cut a new walking-stick.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Bob’s going with
me. He likes the <span class='it'>other</span> kind .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. proper shop-sticks .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
but he’s coming all the same. Shall I cut you a stick
too, Lord Carfax?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The visitor turned to the boy with the gravest attention.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“An ash-stick, Lobbie? Could you grub up an ash
<span class='it'>root</span>? No! I suppose it wants a spade for that! But an
ash-stick, with its own root for handle, is just what I
<span class='it'>am</span> on the lookout for.” He turned round to Gerda with
sly, screwed-up eyelids. “You’re sure you won’t change
your mind, Mrs. Solent, and come with us? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and
Lobbie too?” he added, with an after-thought that
brought wrinkles of roguery into his face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf had already caught the amorous glances with
which their visitor had enwrapped Gerda. It was just as
if some drooping “Gloire de Dijon” rose in a deserted
garden were enwrapped by a rich slant of August sunshine,
full of the heavy poppy-scents of all the yellow
cornfields it has crossed, negligent, careless, and yet
massively intent! “Why <span class='it'>don’t</span> you and Lobbie come with
us?” Wolf feebly muttered; but as he spoke, there
surged up within him a flood of black bile. Oh, how he
hated just then, as he stood with his fingers on the iron
rail of his gate, every one of the people of his life, except
Christie! The maliciousness he felt at that moment
amounted to a deadly distaste. He hated his mother, he
hated Gerda, he hated Carfax, he hated Urquhart, Miss
Gault, Jason! He hated them all, except Christie .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
and, perhaps, old Darnley with his yellow beard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“We’d help you get tea, Gerda?” he murmured obstinately.
“Or we could get it in Ramsgard!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>How queer this malice within him was! It made his
pulses literally thud with its crazy violence. It gave him
a savage, animal-like desire to dig his chin, in a tumbling,
tossing wrestle of hate, into the flesh of Lord
Carfax.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do come, Gerda!” he repeated, in a stubborn refrain.
The girl shook her head; but the radiant expression
she had been wearing in the last two hours did
not pass from her face. It was evident to Wolf that Lord
Carfax had completely won her heart during the short
time he had spent under her roof.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you really want to see where he’s buried?” he
asked, as he conducted his visitor through that grassy
lane he had recently discovered, which made it possible
to reach Poll’s Camp without passing through the town.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I like all graveyards,” replied Lord Carfax, “and
I’ve always been interested in your father.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s a cemetery,” remarked Wolf sulkily. “He’s been
there a long time,” he added.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The weather-beaten countenance of “the lord from
London” wrinkled itself into many genial wrinkles as
it glanced indulgently at Wolf’s surly profile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I was a good deal more interested in him than <span class='it'>she</span>
thought quite decent,” he went on. “I used always to
tell him I’d visit his grave when he was dead. It was
assumed between us, you know, that he <span class='it'>would</span> die. He
always talked of being dead. It seemed to please him in
some way. It certainly never gave <span class='it'>me</span> any great pleasure,
that particular thought!” As his visitor said this he
fixed upon Wolf a look of such humorous whimsicality
that it was almost impossible to see it and remain morose
and truculent. It was a look of penetrating sweetness,
and yet it was shamelessly cynical. Wolf found himself
softening; but this in itself was a thing that increased his
secret irritation!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’d like to show you his grave,” he said bluntly,
feeling as if he would be glad to strike that kindly
visage, and then to kiss it and ask its pardon for the
blow!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He tried to transfer his attention, as they left the lane
and entered the first of the orchards, to the beauty of
that particular afternoon, the last Saturday in May. It
was warm and windless; but a screen of thin, opaque
clouds obscured the sunlight, filtering the hot rays, as
in some old picture, into a mellow spaciousness of
watery gold. In fact, the atmosphere resembled nothing
so much, to Wolf’s mind, as the look of a great glass
jug of cowslip-wine, which about a month ago his
mother, in her drastic, picturesque manner—quite shameless
about the number of flowers she sacrificed for such
a thing—had held up to his lips.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had plenty of time, as they drifted through the
long grass of those three hedged-in orchards that led to
the foot of the hill, to note every feature of his visitor’s
appearance. Lord Carfax was to all intents and purposes
an old man; but he held himself so erect, and he walked
with so resolute a step, that Wolf would have taken him
for a man of fifty. He was in reality rather short—not
much taller than Lobbie; but the massiveness of his
great square head, combined with the solid sturdiness
of his frame, produced the constant illusion that he was
of normal height.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was certainly eccentric in his clothes. His attire
on this occasion gave Wolf the impression of a seafaring
man. He might have been the elderly skipper of
an old-fashioned packet-boat, bound from Weymouth
for the Channel Islands! Wolf had been fascinated by
many things in him from the very start. Partly owing
to his mother’s sardonic predilection, but much more
owing to the man’s own unique personality, he felt completely
at ease with him. The fact that it was due to
this man’s initial intervention—as a relative of both
Mr. Urquhart and Mrs. Solent—that he had come to
Dorset at all, combined with the part the fellow’s shameless
opinions had played in his own secret thoughts, gave
to this rugged and leathery countenance, now that he
saw it at close quarters, an almost legendary glamour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A flicker of snobbishness entered into his feelings too.
But he salved his conscience over this by assuring himself
that he would have been in any case attracted to
a person of this original character. He smiled grimly to
himself, however, as he assisted “Cousin Carfax” in
pushing his way through the hedge-gaps, to discover that
he was already hoping that Jason would never learn
of this prolonged visit! Carfax, he knew, was generally
supposed to have left for London on the previous day.
His remaining at the Three Peewits last night was a
sudden caprice, of which even Mrs. Solent was unaware.
Wolf suspected that Gerda’s beauty had more to do with
it than anything else!</p>

<p class='pindent'>They had hardly got through the last hedge, and were
just about to ascend the southern slope of Poll’s Camp,
when they came upon a shabby-looking man—something
between a tramp and a poor workman—who was resting
himself on a turf-covered mole-hill.</p>

<p class='pindent'>To Wolf’s surprise this man turned out to be none
other than Mr. Stalbridge, the ex-waiter of the Lovelace
Hotel!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The man rose at their approach; and Wolf, ashamed of
his behaviour at their last encounter, greeted him with
exaggerated deference, shaking hands with him and introducing
him to his companion. The ex-waiter professed
a vivid memory of their meeting in the Lovelace Hotel
more than a year ago, and explained that he had got a
temporary job in Blacksod and was now returning to
spend the Sunday in Ramsgard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Stalbridge’s ceremonious manner offered such a
contrast to his shabby attire, that Lord Carfax, who
seemed to collect human curiosities as boys collect butterflies,
entered into a lively conversation with him, and
finally appeared prepared to receive him into their company
as a fellow traveller. Wolf felt a little piqued
by this; for though he had allowed for Gerda’s attractiveness
as an element in their visitor’s interest, he had
assumed that this excursion to the father’s grave implied
a certain desire on his guest’s part to exchange ideas
with the son! Apparently he was mistaken; Carfax’s
attention promised to be totally absorbed by Mr. Stalbridge,
whose humorous anecdotes about the Lovelace
family and other local magnates continued with small
abatement until they reached the summit of Poll’s
Camp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf’s original sensation of pique at this encounter
had increased to a pitch that needed the control of some
quite serious effort of mind, when they stood at length
on the top of the grassy eminence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gerda’s radiance under Carfax’s admiration returned
to him now as an integral portion of the slight he was
enduring. “If she sees much more of these sophisticated
people,” he thought, “she will lose all the simplicity of
her nature!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He flung his gaze round the immense expanse revealed
to them, while Lord Carfax drew heavy breaths,
leaning on his stick; and Mr. Stalbridge continued the
sly process of his courtly seduction. Without being obtrusive
in any particular detail, the lavish waves of
the season’s fertility, feathery grasses, green wheat, new
budding honeysuckle, buttercups in their prime, red and
white hawthorn, seemed to flow over every field and every
hedgerow, between where he stood now on Poll’s Camp
and the mount of Glastonbury.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt at this moment as though humiliation were
dripping into his heart, drop by drop, like carefully
poured medicine into a tumbler of water. So this “lord
from London” took really not the slightest interest in
him! Anxious to help his mother, to help Jason, to
help Mr. Stalbridge, the great man had evidently found
Wolf himself tedious and uninspiring!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Damn the fellow! What do I care what he thinks
of me?” he said to himself; but as Mr. Stalbridge became
more and more voluble, and the leathery creases
of my Lord’s hewn and quarried physiognomy wrinkled
themselves in increasing appreciation, he found that his
humiliation grew unbearable. That luminous look upon
Gerda’s face! Why, he had not been able to summon up
that look for the last six months! She had become a
grown-up woman with him these latter days, tender and
considerate; but this man’s admiration transformed her
back again into an irresponsible little girl!</p>

<p class='pindent'>As soon as the visitor had got his breath, they all
moved on, following the outer circle of the camp and
heading for Babylon Hill.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf was the last to climb across the stile into the
highroad. How rich with the season’s over-brimming
vegetation that hedge-side was! What intoxicating earth-smells
hung about that well-known stile! Trailing dog-roses
that carried frail green buds, whose sweetness resembled
the fragrance of apples and sunburnt hay,
mingled there, as he climbed that stile, with the white
blossoms of tangled umbelliferous growths, their stalks
full of warm, moist sap.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He glanced at the two men’s faces, as they stood,
quite oblivious of him, conversing there in the road.
Yes! There was a scooped-out misery in the ex-waiter’s
eyes that reminded him of the man of the Waterloo steps!
He was evidently making some personal appeal to Carfax
now. Perhaps he hoped to get employment from
him. Perhaps he <span class='it'>would</span> get employment from him! What
a thing it was to be possessed of the power that Carfax
had! Carfax was now succouring the Waterloo-steps
man!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He remained for a minute balanced on the top of
the stile, hugging his knees. He would give this poor
devil every second he could snatch for him of this
lucky chance! Slowly he turned his head and looked
down upon the roofs of the town. “Christie! Christie!”
And there flowed over him the memory of the day,
just three weeks ago, when he had gone down to Weymouth.
There he had seen her—seen her with Olwen in
their new home by the backwater. Till the last minute
of his departure, he and she had sat together on the dry
sand under the Jubilee Clock, while Olwen paddled
among the other children in a sea that danced and glittered
in the jocund sunshine. He could smell the sharp
sea-smells now. He could taste the salt. He could feel the
living slipperiness of a broad brown ribbon of seaweed
that Olwen had picked up, and that both he and Christie
had pressed against their mouths. He could see the name
“Katie” painted in green on a boat-stern, and the faraway
look of the sailor who leaned against it, thinking
God knows what!</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was owing to Carfax—owing to his unstinted purchase
of all those ambiguous books—that these two
had enough to live on. He remembered the night when
Christie had yielded to the little girl’s mania for the
seaside. “It’s our fate, Wolf dear,” she had said, as he
touched her cold cheek. He remembered those last minutes
under the sea-wall; how they had sat so stiff and
straight, letting the loose grains of sand run through
their fingers, staring into each other’s eyes!</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was no book-shop any longer under that roof
down there! Someone else, some overworked green-grocer’s
woman, was at this moment washing her dishes
in Christie’s little alcove, between that parlour and that
bedroom.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Are you ready, Solent? I promised your wife to keep
you alive-o!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Carfax’s voice was friendly. “I’m a fool to feel so
touchy,” he thought, as he jumped down into the road
and joined them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“He’s won his fling,” he thought, glancing sideways at
the ex-waiter’s face, as they moved on together. It was
queer to see that film of unspeakable relief forming
itself, like “cat-ice” over a pool, above those sockets of
despair. Ailinon! but the chap <span class='it'>was</span> like that Waterloo-steps
man. He was at least that man’s representative! He
had denied him half-a-crown that day outside the Abbey;
and now Carfax had stepped in. Everything he
would like to have done Carfax had done. And now he
was dragging along at Carfax’s heels to visit “old Truepenny!”
What a humorous fiasco his whole life down
here in Dorset had been! He had been defeated by
Urquhart .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. paid off, fixed up, bribed, squared! He
had betrayed that skull in the cemetery. He had let his
true-love slip through his hands. His “lord in London”
had recognized Jason’s genius, discovered Gerda’s
beauty, poured oil and wine into the wounds of Mr.
Stalbridge, added a new glory to the tea-shop. Why the
devil should he find anything worth bothering about in
Mr. Wolf Solent, teacher of history in the Blacksod
Grammar School?</p>

<p class='pindent'>As the three men approached a certain group of
larches where Wolf had once wondered what it would be
like to live with Darnley, it became clear to him that Mr.
Stalbridge <span class='it'>was</span> to leave his present miserable job. Apparently
he was to be transformed into some sort of
leisurely factotum, or assistant major-domo, in my Lord’s
London house. What incredible luck for the ex-waiter!
Wolf at this point did feel a certain glow of admiration
for this rugged collector of human butterflies. “How
the devil does he keep that seafaring air,” he thought,
“among his servants in London? Anyway, the hiring of
Mr. Stalbridge is just the kind of thing I’d like to do
myself.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The ex-waiter’s affair being settled, Wolf began to
assume a more prominent place in the attention of the
great man.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How’s my crazy cousin Urquhart?” he enquired. “I
gave his house a wide berth this time! He’s become
‘heavy weather’ these days, with his fixed ideas. Don’t
you feel the same?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What ideas do you mean?” murmured Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His companion gave him a slow, quizzical smile.
“That book of <span class='it'>yours</span>, for one thing! And his absurd
idea that he killed that boy Redfern. I met Doctor Percy
at your mother’s last night, and he told me the boy had
died of double pneumonia. Percy attended him .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
saw him die, in fact .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. had to turn out that precious
Vicar of theirs, who was howling like a poisoned jackal.
Urquhart himself’s going to die, Solent. By Jove! I
felt death in his hand a year ago. I like the fellow; but
when he idealizes his confounded peculiarities to quite
such a tune, you get dead sick of him! I’m all in favour
of honest bawdry myself; but why sing such a song
about it? Natural or unnatural, it’s nature. It’s mortal
man’s one great solace before he’s annihilated! But all
this bladder-headed fuss about it—about such a simple
thing—one way or the other—I don’t like it. It’s not
in my style.” Wolf was astonished at the massive four-square
tone in which the man uttered these last words
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. as if he’d been a great admiral-of-the-fleet criticizing
some popinjay captain for a frivolous manœuvre.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What do <span class='it'>you</span> think?” he enquired of the ex-waiter.
“Do <span class='it'>you</span> agree with Lord Carfax that annihilation is
not to be gainsaid?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The old man appeared to hesitate for a moment. Then
he bent his head and took off his hat. “I believe in the
Resurrection of the Body and the Life Everlasting,” he
said gravely, “if it’s no offence to his lordship.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Put on your hat, Stalbridge; put on your hat,” said
the other. “What do <span class='it'>you</span> think, Solent? You don’t seem
to enjoy expressing your views. You’re like Ann. She
covers everything with such malicious sarcasm that she
makes everything equally unimportant. Do <span class='it'>you</span> believe
in a future life, Solent?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They were now passing one of the numerous cattle-droves
that led into that maze of grassy paths, bordered
by high hedges, which Wolf had come to know as the
Gwent Lanes. Wolf himself was walking on the right
of Lord Carfax, the ex-waiter on the left; so that as he
turned to answer this historic question, he caught the
profiles of both these old men silhouetted against the
rich vegetation of this avenue of grass and greenery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Sometimes I agree with Mr. Stalbridge,” he said,
“and sometimes with you. At this moment I think
I agree with you; but that is probably due to the
fact that I’ve been rather hard-worked at the school
lately.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Carfax made no comment upon this; and presently
Wolf heard him begin to give a humorous account to
the new servant of what he described as his “open
house.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>That glimpse of the Gwent lane behind those two
faces had brought to Wolf a sickening sense of what he
had lost in the disappearance of his “mythology.” A
year ago, how little would it have mattered that he
should have replied so lamely to the great question Carfax
had put to him! He would have let it go. He would
have fallen back on that sense of huge invisible cosmic
transactions, in the midst of which he played his part,
a part totally unaffected by any casual mental lapse.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As they walked on, and he listened with a negligent
ear to the discourse between this master and this servant,
he recognized that the corpse of his life-illusion had
received two fresh spadefuls of earth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The resemblance, faint though it was, of Stalbridge
to the Waterloo waif, considered in the light of that
unbestowed half-a-crown, gave to this generous caprice
of Carfax the quality of something that stepped in “between
the election and his hopes.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>But worse than this were my Lord’s words about
Urquhart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ailinon! Ailinon! Was all the agitation, all the turmoil,
all his consciousness of a supernatural struggle
with some abysmal form of evil, reduced now to the
paltry level of a feeble old bachelor’s fantastic self-deception?</p>

<p class='pindent'>If his imagination had been so moon-struck as to make
so much of a pure phantasy, was it any wonder that
this sagacious man-of-the-world turned away from him
with indifference—turned to his wife’s beauty, turned
to the ex-waiter’s idiosyncrasy, found in him nothing
more than a pedantic usher in a provincial school? He
had been living in a vain dream all these years of his
life—living in it ever since he sat in the sunshine in his
grandmother’s bow-window, watching those painted
boats rock and toss on the glittering Weymouth waves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Christie! Christie! O my lost darling, O my true-love!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>They had now arrived at the point where it was necessary
to follow a field-path across the pastures in order
to reach the cemetery. Mr. Stalbridge proceeded with
elaborate ceremony to bid them both farewell, touching
his uncovered forehead to his new master and extending
his hand to Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“The seven-o’clock train, at Ramsgard, then,” were
Carfax’s last words to him; “and don’t bother about a
ticket. Look out for me in a third-class smoking-carriage!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>As they crossed the fields towards the cemetery, Wolf
visualized the journey of those two old men that night.
In some queer way he felt as if Carfax were a competent
actor, naturally assuming the precise rôle in which
he himself had failed! Carfax would hear that imbecile
youth cry out “Sandbourne Port!” and rattle the milk-cans
on that little, deserted platform! Carfax would see
the tower of Basingstoke Church. Carfax would see that
placid-grazing cow. Carfax would observe, crossing the
same coloured picture of Weymouth Bay, the same blue-bottle
fly .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or his exact representative .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in the
whirligig of chance!</p>

<p class='pindent'>His companion’s feet seemed to drag a little now, as
they made their way between a flowering hawthorn-hedge
and a field of green barley.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I expect we’d better take a carriage back,” Wolf
remarked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s not my boots,” growled Carfax. “I always have
them made at the same place. It’s my socks. A person
knits them for me who was my nurse in former days.
She’s getting old, and her stitches gather into knots
that seem dedicated to gall my kibe.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wonder if we shall find Miss Gault at the grave,”
Wolf said, as he lifted up a barbed-wire rail with the
handle of his stick for Lord Carfax to crawl under. “I
hope we shall. The last time I saw her was when she
tripped over a milk-bottle and I got angry with her attitude
to my mother.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The deep-set eyes of his companion had a whimsical
gleam in them as he struggled to his feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It was your father’s affair with Miss Gault,” he
gasped, “that gave me my chance with Ann. God! how
Urquhart used to gird at me for my mania for that sweet
creature! I suppose you have no more idea than a
leopard’s cub, Solent, how enchanting she was in those
days!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf stopped short as they picked their way between
the graves. “What was it you said made you want to
see where he’s buried?” he enquired in a high-pitched
voice.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The ancient mariner’s visage before him contracted
itself into what almost amounted to a gamin’s grimace.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I detect,” he said, “a tone in your voice, Solent, and
a quiver in your lips, that suggest I’m on dangerous
ground. But the truth is I swore to him once that if he
caved in before me I’d come and make a signal to his
old cadaver. That’s twenty-five years ago, Wolf Solent;
and I’ve never done it till this moment.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“One minute!” interrupted Wolf, as the visitor made
a motion to advance. His voice certainly had a vibration
in it that was a surprise to himself. It was apparently no
surprise to Lord Carfax; but the man gave him a quick,
penetrating, suspicious glance. Wolf flung a hurried look
sideways. It was impossible to see William Solent’s
headstone from where they stood. No stranger could
possibly find the spot unless led to it by an habitué
of that place.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Did you have an exciting love-affair with my
mother?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The remark sounded quite as childish, quite as insolent,
to his own ears, as doubtless it did to those of
his interlocutor. But he followed it up with a further
challenge.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“My mother treated my father abominably!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>His lip <span class='it'>was</span> trembling now. Violent pulses throbbed
in both his wrists, like lilliputian engines. He knitted his
eyebrows and glared at the rugged folds of tanned skin
that surrounded this man’s eyes, giving them the guarded
alertness of a kindly, but very wary, deer-stalker.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Carfax squared his shoulders; and then, without removing
his gaze from Wolf’s face, he proceeded to button
his overcoat tightly about his neck. The next thing he
did was to fold both his hands—one of them holding
his ash-stick—massively behind his back. The measured
gravity of this gesture, as Wolf recalled it afterwards,
resembled that of some seventeenth-century cavalier accosted
by a highwayman!</p>

<p class='pindent'>His compact, sturdy figure, his formidable, level stare,
presented themselves to Wolf like the embodiment of
every banked-up and buttressed tradition in English social
life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You were very young at that time, Solent,” he remarked
in a guarded tone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You must have got enormous satisfaction,” Wolf went
on, “in punishing my father for his rascality. You and
my mother must have felt like avenging angels!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The weather-beaten creases about the man’s eyes
thickened so shrewdly that no more than two gleaming
little slits of menacing roguery confronted Wolf’s vibrant
nerves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t think we felt exactly angelic,” chuckled Lord
Carfax.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The curious thing about what happened then was the
ferocious lucidity with which Wolf ransacked his own
emotional state.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He recognized that one part of his nature was stirred
in an affectionate response toward the rugged face before
him. What he felt was that the skull under that
mound in the pauper’s plot <span class='it'>must</span> be championed at this
crisis, or it would be betrayed beyond recovery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You think all scruples are uncivilized bigotry where
sex is concerned; isn’t that it?”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Carfax merely bowed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf knew perfectly well that what he was yielding to
now was an insane desire to make this man responsible—as
if he had been fate itself—for all the convoluted
bitterness of his dilemma between Gerda and Christie!
Those imaginary dialogues with the fellow, over the
kitchen-stove, seethed in his mind like steam under a
lid. He knew, too, that he was revenging himself now for
Carfax’s attraction towards Gerda, for his indifference
to himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come!” he cried in a trembling voice, “Come! There
isn’t time to hunt about here for the place they used to
bury workhouse inmates in, twenty-five years ago!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Carfax took off his hat and rubbed his corrugated
forehead with the palm of one of his hands. When he
removed his fingers, Wolf caught a glimpse of a pair
of agitated eyes roving in troubled scrutiny over the
headstones to his left. The man’s eyes had indeed become
so much like those of a nervous hunter, that his
whole face assumed a disarming and boyish anxiety, as
if he were watching for the head of an otter or the
fin of a pike in a disturbed stream!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Come!” repeated Wolf. “I’ll put you on the road
to the Lovelace, and you can get a carriage or something
to take you back to Blacksod. I’m going to walk back;
but Gerda won’t forgive me if <span class='it'>you’re</span> late, and if you
get a cab you’ll be with her long before I am! I’m sure
she’s buying cakes for you at Pimpernel’s this very moment!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Before he had reached the word “Pimpernel” in this
speech, at which point the lips of Lord Carfax broke into
a smile of roguish gusto, he was aware of a very stern,
straight look from the man’s grey eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ve annoyed you for ever now, I suppose,” Wolf
murmured in a low voice. Lord Carfax surveyed him
sternly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t like it when people’s nerves get out of control,”
he said. “My instinct is to beat them down, as a
menace to civilized behaviour! But after all, Solent,
here I am, at your father’s request! If you’d rather not
show me his grave”—it was at this point that Wolf
caught that disarming glint again, like the baffled innocence
of a fisherman, emanating from beneath the
old man’s eyelids—“I don’t want to annoy you. But
don’t be too leisurely over your stroll back, my lad. If
you are, there won’t be many of those Pimpernel cakes
left!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“This is your nearest way out,” said Wolf laconically.
Stepping carefully, in advance, between the rows of
green mounds, upon many of which grew little patches of
yellow buttercups and white clover, he guided his
mother’s and his wife’s admirer to the main cemetery-entrance.
He managed to cast a quick glance in the
direction of the grave. No! Miss Gault was not there.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once in the road, he began giving his companion careful
directions how to reach the Lovelace.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he repeated those directions, he was aware of the
man’s attentive countenance, bent a little sideways towards
him, wearing something of the expression with
which an experienced ostler would attend to the inarticulate
language of an erratic horse!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The effort of formulating those practical instructions
in that silent spot, while the invisible magnetism of so
much death-nourished vegetation permeated his senses,
threw Wolf’s brain into a confused stupor. He found,
while he was slowly explaining to Carfax how to take
the short-cut under the Preparatory School wall, past
the Headmaster’s garden and the entrance to the Abbey,
that he was <span class='it'>surprised</span> at having seen nothing of Miss
Gault. He kept glancing at the deserted roadway before
them, so warm, so opalescent, in the diffused light. He
had an obstinate feeling that Miss Gault <span class='it'>must</span> be upon
that road, either coming or going—a feeling that resembled
some kind of chemical clairvoyance in the very
marrow of his bones.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His mind, preoccupied with Miss Gault, became now
most vividly conscious of the slaughter-house. The
slaughter-house looked especially harmless at that moment;
but he regarded it with sick aversion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“These deeds must not be thought after these ways;
so, it will make us mad.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Of course, even while he saw her standing there, he
knew he was imagining it, and that she had no palpable
reality. This phenomenon, this visualizing of a
bodily image that was <span class='it'>known</span> by his reason to be unreal,
was one that he had suffered from before.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“You’ll find her,” he was speaking of the sedate lady
in the hotel-office, “very stiff but very polite.” But while
he was uttering these words, he saw Miss Gault’s figure
quite palpably before him. He saw her bony shoulders
turned to him, black in the roadway. And there was her
arm, with clenched hand, lifted up in prophetic malediction!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“They’re killing something in there,” he thought. And
then, for the infinitesimal part of a second, there arose
within him an awareness of blinding pain, followed by
thick darkness smeared with out-rushing blood. As this
sank away, there ensued a murky dizziness in his brain,
accompanied by a shocking sense that both his father’s
skull and this woman’s arm were appealing to him to
do something that he lacked the courage to do. His legs
had turned into immovable lead, as happens in nightmares.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Very stiff .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. very polite,” he repeated mechanically,
perfectly conscious that he was smiling into the
man’s face with a forced repulsive smile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Carfax had suddenly become an alert, compact
man of action. His expression was more mariner-like
than ever. Wolf’s eccentric maliciousness might have been
a troublesome wave risen from an unexpected reef. Carfax
looked curiously at him, his heavy eyelids screwed
up, his mouth a little open, his chin set square in his
muffler.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Off with you, lad!” he said in a pleasant voice. “It’ll
do you good to have that walk back alone! Off with you;
and look alive-o now! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. if you’re going to get home
before I finish up those cakes!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Not Mr. Stalbridge himself could have obeyed his new
master more submissively than Wolf obeyed this command.
He was well inside the cemetery before Carfax
had gone half-a-dozen steps. From behind the hedge he
followed his measured and resolute advance up the road,
up the warm clover-scented road, past the slaughter-house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was through the tangled greenery of a clustered
tuft of budding honeysuckle that he watched Lord Carfax.
The faint sweetness of that leafiness remained with
him, like a covering of ointment round the bloody
stump of an amputated limb, when finally he left his
vantage-ground and strode over to the pauper’s plot.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The first thing he noticed was a pair of white butterflies
flying awkwardly together, linked in an ecstasy of
love. They seemed to float upon the warm clover-scented
air as if their four wings belonged to one single life
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. an insect-angel of an Apocalypse of the Minute!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I should not have had the courage to interfere,” he
thought, “even if an animal was being killed. But Miss
Gault would. She’d have rushed straight to the place!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He dug the end of his stick into the turf by the side
of the mound and leaned on the handle, frowning down
upon what he visioned six feet below.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“O Christie! O my true-love!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Stubbornly he set himself to analyze how it was that
with the loss of his life-illusion he could yet feel as he
did about Christie!</p>

<p class='pindent'>There hung about the idea of her still .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. yes! still,
still, still! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and it was <span class='it'>this</span> that he must explain to
that skull down there .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a sweetness as exciting as
the wildest fancies of his youth, as those dark, secret
fancies where the syllables “a girl” carried with them so
yielding an essence that breasts and hips and thighs lost
themselves in an unutterable mystery!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Do you hear me, old Truepenny?” and it seemed
to him, as he stared at the grass, that his soul became a
sharp-snouted mole, refusing to cease from its burrowing
till it had crouched down close beside those empty eyeholes,
and had fumbled and ferreted at that impious,
unconquerable grin!</p>

<p class='pindent'>His father <span class='it'>must</span> hear him! Surely, between those bones
that had set themselves against his mother’s bones, so
that he might be born, and his present living body, there
must be something .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. some sort of link!</p>

<p class='pindent'>That was what he wanted, some ear into which he
could pour the whole weight of his seething distress.
Where else could he go?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Back once more across the grave floated those interlaced,
fluttering wings. The contrast between the clover-scents
that his nostrils inhaled and the desperation of his
mood seemed to him like a well-aimed shaft of derision.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“If there <span class='it'>is</span> some monstrous consciousness behind all
life,” he thought angrily, “it’s responsible for <span class='it'>all</span> the
horrors! Come on, old Truepenny; let father and son
celebrate this meeting with a private little curse at God.
Let the worm in your mouth be the tongue shot out at
Him! Let the look in the eyes of that Waterloo-steps
man be His eternal peace!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>No sooner had Wolf articulated this catapult of malice
against the unknown First Cause, than, without any apparent
reason, he suddenly bethought himself of the
boy Barge.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Barge would never curse God,” he thought. “Under
the worst extremity of suffering he never would! Barge
would forgive God instinctively, without an effort.” Barge
did, no doubt, forgive Him every day! If Barge had the
power of causing God to be tortured for all the torture
God had caused, Barge would refrain, <span class='it'>as naturally as
the wind blows</span>. Barge would let the great evil Spirit
completely off!</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he meditated upon this forgiveness of God by
Barge, Wolf found himself pulling his stick out of the
earth and wiping the end of it, even as a duellist might
wipe a sword, with his bare hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But to forgive <span class='it'>for oneself</span> is one thing,” he thought.
“To forgive for others .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. for innocents .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. for animals
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. is another thing! Barge <span class='it'>is</span> an innocent; so
it may be permitted to <span class='it'>him</span> to forgive. I am not an innocent.
I know more than Barge. I know too much.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He remained in deep, fixed, wordless thought, after
that, for several minutes. Then he opened and shut
the fingers of his left hand with a convulsive movement.
Had his father’s skull been able to cast a conscious
eye upon him, through the intervening mould, it would
have supposed he was freeing his fingers from the clay
which, a moment ago, he had wiped from the stick;
but what he really was doing was getting rid of the
contamination, not of clay, but of thought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had told himself a story in that brief while! He had
imagined himself meeting Jesus Christ in the shape of
the man of the Waterloo steps. He had imagined the man
stopping him—it was by the stile on Babylon Hill—and
asking him what he was doing. His answer had been
given with a wild, crazy laugh. “Can’t you see I’m living
my secret life?” he had said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“What secret life?” the man had asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Running away from the horrors!” he had cried,
in a great screaming voice, that had rung over the roofs
of Blacksod. But immediately afterwards he had imagined
himself as becoming very calm and very sly. “It’s
all right. It’s absolutely all right,” he had whispered furtively
in the man’s ears. “You needn’t suffer. I let you
off. <span class='it'>You are allowed to forget.</span> It doesn’t matter what
your secret life is. I’ve told you what mine is; and I
now tell you that it can be borne. So you can stop looking
like that! Any secret life can be borne when once
you’ve been told that you have the right to forget. And
that’s what I’ve told <span class='it'>you</span> now.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was when he was imagining the man’s answer that
he had been compelled to practise his own doctrine with
violent rapidity; and the next thing he did was to stoop
down and dig his fingers into the roots of the grass,
where he supposed his father’s head would be. “Good-bye,
Father!” he muttered; and straightening his back,
with a sigh he turned sharp round, and without further
parley moved from the spot.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He began by directing his steps towards the main
highroad by which they had come; but he hadn’t gone
far when he suddenly swung about and made for the
King’s Barton lane.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I don’t want him to pick me up,” he thought. “They’re
sure to take him that way.” As he followed the familiar
road to King’s Barton, he recalled his first drive along it,
by Darnley’s side, fourteen months ago.</p>

<p class='pindent'>How he had stared into the future then .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that future
which was now the past! How he had hugged his
“mythology” to his soul, during that drive, feeling so
confident that nothing in that fertile land could arise
to destroy it!</p>

<p class='pindent'>As he went along now, trailing his stick behind him,
he became aware that with the approach of the end of
the pearl-soft afternoon the voices of countless hidden
blackbirds were mounting up, rich and sweet, from the
green depths of the hedges.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“She’s lost the power to whistle,” he said to himself,
“just as I’ve lost my mythology!” And the identity
of Gerda, her excitement about their new silver, their
new curtains, their new clock, her radiance in being attractive
to Lord Carfax, melted into the sad-gay music
poured forth from those invisible yellow beaks, until
he felt as if he were walking along a road that passed
through her heart, a road the very atmosphere of which
was the breath of her young soul!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Those blackbird-notes in the hedges seemed to allay
the tension of his nerves as if they had been the touch
of the girl’s flesh. His outraged mind, with its grievance
against the First Cause, seemed actually to float away
from his body as it moved quietly along. Between his
body, thus freed from his tormented spirit, and the increasing
loveliness of that perfect day, there began to
establish itself a strange chemical fusion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He came upon a certain gate now where he had once
wondered what it would be like to live with Darnley.
Once more he rested there, leaning his arms on its grey
top-bar and staring over the expanse of greenness separating
him from Melbury Bub.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Yes, without any conscious motion of his will something
was softening within him towards the long future
stretch of the days of his life!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He began to grow conscious of how separate his assuaged
senses were from that tormented spirit of his
that had just cursed God. What was it that had worked
this change in him? Those blackbird-notes? Was it
merely that his body, hearing those sounds, plunged into
the sweetness of Gerda’s body? But now, from the thought
of Gerda his mind reverted to Christie. After all, it was
the same First Cause which tortured him that had made
it possible that such a being as Christie should exist.
God must be something that all conscious lives are
doomed to curse and to bless in eternal alternation!</p>

<p class='pindent'>After all, Christie <span class='it'>did</span> belong to him, as she had never
belonged, and never <span class='it'>would</span> belong, to anyone else. So
easily might he never have met her—never met the one
person he could love with all the worst and all the best
in his contradictory nature! Many would be the Saturdays,
many the Sundays, he would walk with her now,
along the backwater, along that familiar esplanade! In
an upwelling of sad, sweet tenderness, he saw himself as
an old grey-headed schoolmaster .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. still at his job in
that ink-stained room .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. walking, with Christie on one
arm and Olwen, grown tall and disdainful, on the other,
past the bow-windows of Brunswick Terrace!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Certain little physical tricks Christie had, separating
her from everyone else, came back to him now. The way
she would turn her face sideways to speak to him when
she was poking the fire, the way she swayed her wrists
as if over an old-fashioned harpsichord, when she was arranging
her teacups, the way she would hitch up her
skirt when it hung too loose over her straight hips, the
way she would stretch her head out of the window, drinking
up the air with a kind of thirsty fury after struggling
to express some subtle metaphysical idea that had baffled
her power of words—all these things hit him now
with no empty finality of loss, but with a sort of mystic
consummation. It was as if, utterly beyond his effort—as
it was beyond his merit—chance itself had caused the
earth to whisper some clue-word into the ears of his
flesh, a word that his <span class='it'>body</span> understood, though his mind
was too humiliated to focus itself upon it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Pondering upon what was happening to him, he turned
from that gate and continued his way; but his stick was
held firmly by the handle now, and his feet were no
longer dragging as they moved.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He began obscurely to feel that he might get <span class='it'>some</span>
happiness out of his life after all .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. even if he had
to work at that school till he died .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. even if he never
were allowed so much as to kiss Christie again!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He became more and more aware that it was just the
simple chemistry of his body that, under the beauty of
this hour, was coming to its own conclusions! It was as
if his flesh were drinking in and soaking up this beauty,
while his soul, cut into pieces by his recent humiliation
like a worm by a bird’s beak, wriggled and squirmed
somewhere above his head!</p>

<p class='pindent'>His outward skin luxuriated in all this loveliness. It
drenched itself in the pearl-soft air, like a naked swimmer
in a glimmering sea. But his mind was still malcontent.
It kept wincing under its own recent twinges. But it was
divided from him in some way, so that it was no longer
able to turn a torturous screw in his living brain! It
was just as if some heavenly music were pouring into an
entranced ear, while the brain behind the ear was beating
about in chaotic misery.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Chaotic indeed! The core of his mind felt as though it
were a multiple thing and lacked a centre. It felt as
though its disintegrated consciousness resembled that of
an amœba, of a zoophyte. It felt envious of the human
happiness that had begun to penetrate its attendant body.
Wolf knew that the man holding that oak-stick was himself;
he knew it was Wolf Solent, on his way home to
eat Pimpernel’s cakes and to watch his wife flirt with
Lord Carfax. But he felt that the identity of his soul
and his body was broken. His soul had received such
crushing disgraces that like a thousand globules of quicksilver
it no longer dwelt where normal souls <span class='it'>ought</span> to
dwell!</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was out of all this chaos within him, that he now
set himself, as he strode along, to concentrate his will
upon Christie and upon her life by that Weymouth backwater.
“Oh, may she be happy!” he cried blindly to the
grass and the trees. And then a queer psychic inkling
came upon him, an inkling that it would be possible for
him, now that he no longer had anything left but certain
bodily sensations, now that he had become a depersonalized
inhuman force, without hope or aim, to exercise
a genuine power, an almost supernatural power, over the
future of the entity he loved. The more he pondered on
this, the more possible did the thing appear to him! As
he surveyed the blossoms of a great lilac-bush in the
first King’s Barton garden he reached, he seemed to
visualize the demiurge of the universe as so much diffused
sub-conscious magnetism submissive to nothing
but commands .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. commands rather than prayers!</p>

<p class='pindent'>The luminous enchantment which this perfect afternoon
threw upon those blossoms caused him to stop dead-still
in front of them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I <span class='it'>command</span>,” he uttered in a grave, loud tone, “I
<span class='it'>command</span> that she shall be happy!” And then, with a
grotesque solemnity, as if for a second of time he had
been given the power to destroy all ordinary sense of
proportion, he repeated, as though addressing a slow-witted
interlocutor, “It’s Christie Malakite I mean, who
lives by the Backwater at Weymouth.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He concluded this fantastic ceremony by an audible
chuckle; but his steps, as he strode through the village
of King’s Barton at a swinging pace, were freer and
stronger than they had been for a very long time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Still, however, he could not shake off the feeling that
his soul had become a drifting multiplicity without any
nucleus. There had occurred an actual “resurrection”
of his body, which was now giving to his behaviour the
aspect, the motions, the gestures of exultant well-being,
while his inner nature remained a blur of disgusting
confusion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Walking is my cure,” he thought. “As long as I can
walk I can get my soul into shape! It must have been
an instinct of self-preservation that has always driven
me to walk!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had reached the churchyard-wall now; and he
couldn’t resist the temptation of stopping for a minute
to visit Redfern’s grave. As he was scrambling over the
low rampart of crumbling yellowish stone, he heard the
droning of an aeroplane somewhere above his head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Mine enemy hath found me out,” he said to himself.
“I suppose walking up and down upon the earth will
cease altogether soon. Well, I’m going to walk till I
die!” And to avoid giving his airy antagonist even the
honour of one inquisitive glance, he proceeded to keep
his eyes in religious malice rigorously fixed upon the
grass beneath his feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His method of advance was more conducive to cerebral
revenge than to alert vision; and when he did reach his
destination he found a wheelbarrow full of grass by the
side of the grave, and beyond the wheelbarrow, bending
low and armed with a pair of gleaming shears, the figure
of Roger Monk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The peculiarly subtle smell of the green grass in the
wheelbarrow gave him a thrill of such strange contentment
that his greeting of his old acquaintance was cordial
in the extreme.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How’s the squire?” he enquired after a minute or
two’s discussion of the weather. Roger Monk chuckled
grimly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“There was a time, sir,” he replied—and Wolf noticed
that the gardener’s accent still wavered between
the intonation of the Shires and the intonation of Dorset,
“when, as you know, sir, I could have given that man
his queetus. But he’s not what he was, Mr. Solent, and
that’s the long and short of it.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>The word “queetus,” in place of “quietus,” so tickled
Wolf’s fancy that he could only make an amiable grimace
in response, a grimace that implied that the world
had long been aware that Mr. Monk’s bark was worse
than his bite.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How does he sleep these days?” he enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Much better, sir, thank ’ee. In fact, he’s slept wonderful
sound ever since Master Round and me dug this ’ere
grave as ’twere right it should be dug. Old Jack Torp,
if I may say so, made a poor job of this burying! Squire
was worriting himself over it fearsome. That beer-barrel
of a Torp, if you’ll excuse such speaking, Mr. Solent,
of a party a gentleman like yourself be allied to, ain’t
no more a sexton than he be an undertaker! Them stonecutters
should leave the spade alone. They should leave
burying alone, and stick to their own job.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>This plausible and innocent explanation of what he
and Valley had witnessed did not by any means convince
Wolf. But neither did it lessen his humiliation. He began
to feel as if the perversity of Mr. Urquhart, the incest of
Mr. Malakite, the lechery of Bob Weevil, the morbidity of
Jason, were all of such slight importance, compared with
the difference between being alive and being dead, that
he had made a fool of himself in making so much of
them. Such, at any rate, seemed to be the opinion of his
body; and it was his body now that had taken the rudder
in its hand! His body? No! It was more than his body!
Behind the pulse-beat of his body stirred the unutterable
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. stirred something that was connected with the
strange blueness he had seen long ago over the Lunt meadows
and more recently at the window of Pond
Cottage .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. something to that was connected with that
heathen goodness that came so naturally to Gaffer
Barge.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“How is Mr. Valley, Roger?” he asked. “I haven’t seen
him since before the Otter wedding.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Monk lowered his voice and jerked his thumb in the
direction of the vicarage. “Squire’s gone to drink tea
with him this very afternoon,” he whispered. “Squire
don’t know that I know it. Nor do he know that Mrs. Martin
and our maid knows it. He’s a proud old gent, is
Squire; and he’s cursed the Reverend so bitter that ’twould
be awkward if all were known.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Are they friends again, then?” asked Wolf.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Monk gave a furtive glance at the church and
another at Redfern’s grave. He seemed to suspect invisible
eavesdroppers from both those directions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Squire ain’t, and never has been, what you might call
religious,” he said, “but he’s got fixed in his mind, since
his sleep returned to him, that our parson have worked
a miracle. ’Twould be all my place is worth if he knew
I know what he’s up to.” Here the man came extremely
close to Wolf and almost touched his face as he whispered
in his ear, “He’ve a-been over there three times
this week already!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf drew away as discreetly as he could. Mr. Monk’s
breath smelt so strongly of gin that he wondered if
the servant hadn’t been drinking with the clergyman
in the kitchen prior to the master’s refreshment in the
study!</p>

<p class='pindent'>A queer notion seized upon him now, as he looked
this man up and down—a fantastic and even obscene
notion. He mentally stripped the tall rascal of every
rag of clothing! He visualized his heavy chest, his huge
knees .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. he saw them unwashed and dirty.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But
suddenly, in the twinkling of an eye, he knew for a certainty,
beyond all logic, that this astronomical universe,
of which the monstrous frame of Mr. Monk occupied the
foreground, was merely a filmy, phantasmal screen, separating
him from an indrawn reality into which at any
moment he might wake—wake despoiled and released. It
was the feet of Mr. Monk, or rather the dirty nails of
his huge toes, observed with this grotesque maliciousness,
that seemed the seal of certainty upon this mystical
knowledge!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Well, I must be emptying this barrow and getting
home,” said the innocent Roger.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Good luck to you!” replied Wolf in a loud, hollow
tone, as he recovered from his trance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When the man had gone off and he was left to himself,
he had time to note that not a sign was left now of
the grave’s recent disturbance. Redfern’s mound, neatly
sheared by the gardener’s shears, looked just the same as
all the other graves in the vicinity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf sighed wearily. That last piece of information
about Mr. Urquhart seemed to have landed him on the
deepest bed-rock of his self-contempt. What? Had he
seen himself all this while as a great spiritual antagonist
to the squire, only to find at the last that the man
was paying surreptitious visits to T. E. Valley?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Probably,” he thought, “he’s begging Tilly-Valley to
let him take the Sacrament!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stared at the mound in front of him, wondering,
with cynical indifference, whether the body of the boy
had been exposed or not. But now, at any rate, he was
“free among the dead.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Christie! Christie!” He tried to visualize that fragile
figure at this very moment coming back to tea from a
stroll along the backwater where she had gone with Olwen
to see the Abbotsbury swans!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Death and Love! In those two alone lay the ultimate
dignity of life. Those were the sacraments, those were
the assuagements. Death was the great altar where the
candles were never extinguished for such as loathed the
commonplace.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And it was just this that these accursed inventions
were seeking to destroy! They would dissect love, till it
became “an itch of the blood and a permission of the
will”; they would kill all calm, all peace, all solitude;
they would profane the majesty of death till they vulgarized
the very background of existence; they would
flout the souls of the lonely upon the earth, until there
was not one spot left by land or by water where a human
being could escape from the brutality of mechanism,
from the hard glitter of steel, from the gaudy insolence
of electricity!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“ ‘Jimmy Redfern,—<span class='it'>he</span> was there!’ ” he hummed savagely
as he moved off; and then, as he scrambled back
into the road, he wondered to himself what new mood it
was that he had detected in Roger Monk. The man seemed
to speak of Mr. Urquhart with a completely different
intonation. Wolf’s morbid imagination began at once picturing
a new Mr. Urquhart, a Mr. Urquhart in an old
age of dotage, fallen entirely into the hands of Mr.
Monk and of that precious crony of his that he called
“Master Round”!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I’ll call at the Manor House next Saturday,” he
thought, “and find out what Tilly-Valley has done to
him.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He glanced at his watch. Oh, he would be hopelessly
late for tea! Well, Gerda wouldn’t mind; and Lord Carfax
would be thoroughly delighted!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He soon found that the faster he walked through that
unequalled atmosphere, the stronger and calmer grew
his mind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The muscles of his body, his skin, his senses, his nerves,
his breath, seemed to be gathering up from the soil a
new power, a new endurance. The final stamping-down
of the earth upon his old life-illusion was the vision,
though it may well have been imaginary, of Mr. Urquhart
pleading for the Sacrament with Tilly-Valley. He
recognized now that his secret motive of all these months
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. yes, he had felt it by the banks of the Lunt, the
day of the “yellow bracken” .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. had been his faith in
some vast earth-born power within him that was stronger
than the Christian miracle! Had Tilly-Valley won, then?
Had he beaten them all? Had the absurd little fool mesmerized
the soul of the great John Urquhart, even as
he had mesmerized the soul of Mr. Round?</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>No! He would <span class='it'>not</span> yield! The inborn goodness of
Barge .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a thing natural and inevitable as the rising
of the sap in the tree .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. was stronger than all the
“white magic” in the world.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Oh, Christie! Oh, Christie! Would Gerda mind if he
went down to Weymouth tomorrow week? He felt a
longing to ask Christie what <span class='it'>she</span> thought about the difference
between the “goodness” of Barge and the “faith”
of Tilly-Valley. Perhaps, now it was dead, he would
tell her about his “mythology.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>Quicker and quicker circulated the blood through his
veins as he entered Blacksod and reached the familiar
parting of the ways. There was no hesitation there now.
He had never once gone past the book-shop since she had
left it!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He found himself dallying with many happier thoughts
as he hurried by the Torp yard. Surely he had fallen as
low as he could fall! The loveliness of this day .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a
gift thrown out to him by Chance, the greatest of all the
gods .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. seemed to have touched his body with a kind
of blind new birth. He began to feel conscious again, as
he had done over the corpse of old Malakite, of himself
as a moving animal, full of a vivid, tingling life that extended
into the very fingers with which he clasped his
stick. And not only as an animal! The immense vegetable
efflorescence by which he had been surrounded seemed
to have drawn his nerves back and down, soothing them,
healing them, calming them, in a flowing reciprocity with
that life that was far older than any animal life.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ah! His body and his soul were coming together again
now! Emanating from his lean, striding form, from his
spine, from his legs, from his finger-tips, his spirit extended
outwards, dominating this forked “animal-vegetable”
which was himself. And with this new awareness
as his background, he set himself to face in stoical
resolution all the years of his life, as he saw them before
him, dusty milestones along a dusty highway!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He said grimly to himself, “No gestures now!” And
it was <span class='it'>not</span> a gesture that he made at this moment, as he
gathered himself together to be an usher in Blacksod
Grammar School for the remainder of his life! He kept
his spirits down on purpose, visualizing the innumerable
moments of discomfort, of nervous misery, that lay before
him. He stretched out his hand to pluck at those
wretched future moments, so that he might appropriate
them now and grapple with them now.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“But it isn’t all there is!” he said to himself as he approached
Preston Lane. “The whole astronomical world
is only a phantasm, compared with the circles within
circles, the dreams within dreams, of the unknown reality!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He passed Mrs. Herbert’s house and came to the pigsty.
Ailinon! The memories! Peering furtively up the
street to his own threshold .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. yes, he could see that
the parlour-windows were both open. He came to a
pause now, hot and breathless from his rapid walking,
and leant upon the pigsty-railing. That smell of pigs’
urine, mingled, just as it was a year ago, with the smell
of the flowering hedge, gave him a thrill of delicious
sadness, and all Dorset seemed gathered up into it!
Little wayside cottages, fallen trees, stubble-fields, well-heads,
duck-ponds, herds of cattle visioned through the
frames of shed-doors—all these things flooded his mind
now with a strange sense of occult possession. They were
only casual groupings of chance-offered objects; but as
they poured pell-mell into his memory, across the reek
and the jostling of those uplifted snouts, he felt that
something permanent and abiding out of such accidents
would give him strength to face the ink-stained classroom—to
face the days and days and days—without his
“mythology” and without Christie!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He must have been at the cellar-floor of misery when
he licked with his mental tongue the filthy toe-nails of
Mr. Monk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And yet it was from that very beastliness that he discovered
the fact that beyond all refutation an actual portion
of his mind was <span class='it'>outside the whole astronomical
spectacle</span>!</p>

<p class='pindent'>More heavily than ever now did he lean on that railing,
while the pigs, to whom all human heads were the same,
grunted and squealed for their bucket.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then he straightened his back, waved his hand to the
disappointed pigs, and moved on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had hardly taken a step when he suddenly thought
of Poll’s Camp. What was it? An entrancing bird’s note
made him stop again and glance up the road to where the
great ash-tree extended its cool, glaucous green branches
against the pearl-soft sky.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Another yellow-beak! It had been a thrush last year.
Were Gerda and Lord Carfax listening to this liquid
music as they ate their Pimpernel cakes?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Fool! Fool! Fool! It was not in the tree at all. Oh,
he had known it all the while! In the deepest pit of his
stomach he had known. It was the girl herself. The blackbird’s
notes were issuing from that open window. It was
Gerda’s whistling. That strange power had been given
back to her at last!</p>

<p class='pindent'>For a second he just abandoned himself to the beauty
of the sound. It was this pearl-soft day itself, consummated,
incarnated, in flowing drops of immortal ichor!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then a queer transformation automatically took place
in him. His ripened “soul,” that magnetic cloud about
him, drew close to his body like a garment of flexible
steel. His muscles contracted, like those of a feline animal
stalking its prey. His whole personality became a tense,
bent bow of cold, vibrant jealousy, the string pressed
taut, the arrow quivering.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hunching his shoulders, his stick held by the middle—but
he had no thought of either Hector of Troy or William
of Deloraine!—he ran across the road and advanced
stealthily and rapidly along the pavement. His gaze was
fixed on the dark aperture of the window through which
the whistling came. He intended to <span class='it'>see</span>, at least one good
second, before he <span class='it'>was seen</span>! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Yes. He had known it. He had known it far down in
his consciousness all that long day! His glance, when he
reached the window, was swift, decisive, devastating. It
lasted less than a third of a second; and then he drew
back and shuffled out of sight against their neighbour’s
railings.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The teacups had been used, the cakes eaten. And there,
seated in the low chair by the side of the littered tray,
was Lord Carfax, with a look of the most sun-warmed
aplomb that he had ever seen on a human countenance;
and there, seated on his knee, with her lips pursed-up and
the expression of a radiant infant upon her face, was
Gerda .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. whistling .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. whistling .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. whistling! .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Ripeness is all.” The words seemed to come into his
mind from nowhere .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to come into his mind from
that region, whatever it was, that was <span class='it'>not</span> the universe!</p>

<p class='pindent'>They certainly had not their ordinary meaning for
him, as he recoiled from what he had seen. They meant
that the lords of life had now filled his cup—filled it up
to the brim. Little had he known how much this girl’s
devotion to him had come to mean. Christie was his
horizon; but this girl was the solid ground beneath him.
And now the ground had moved!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Like a man who sees his foothold cracking between
his feet, and, instead of hurrying forward, looks down,
in curious interest, one foot on each side of the crevasse,
at a disturbed beetle scrambling up one of the edges of
the chasm, Wolf stood on the pavement outside the pig-dealer’s
house and stared at the shed across the way.</p>

<p class='pindent'>If only she hadn’t let him take her on his knee! How
<span class='it'>interested</span> all the people of his life would be that she
had let him take her upon his knee! He felt as if Carfax
had come into his life for this sole purpose alone—to
take Gerda upon his knee! How he could see the nodding
heads of all the people of his life, as they glanced at one
another <span class='it'>displaying their interest</span> in what had happened!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Carfax had saved the man on the Waterloo steps. At
least he had saved Stalbridge! Carfax had paid Christie
five times their value for the books in the shop. Carfax
had condemned Urquhart to a harmless dotage. And
now, with the crumbs of Pimpernel’s cakes strewing the
tea-table, Carfax had restored to Gerda her unique gift.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Bob Weevil had had to be cajoled into that bedroom
before he grew daring. “Lords in London” had none of
these Blacksod scruples. To Carfax it was nothing .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
a trifle, a bagatelle .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and yet it was pleasant .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
to feel the warmth of a girl’s body pressed against him,
while by his glowing sympathy he gave her back her
youth, gave her back the life that she had lost in her
twelve months with a priggish schoolmaster!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wolf found it necessary at that moment to act in an
almost jaunty manner. He balanced his stick under his
arm—a thing he had never done before; and he thrust
his hands into his trouser-pockets—a gesture that was
completely unnatural to him. He began moving along the
pavement towards the town; but when he found himself
opposite Mrs. Herbert’s door, he remembered .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. he
must have been instinctively turning to her, like an outraged
cub to its dam .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that his mother lived now
above her grand new shop!</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was at this point that he realized that he must find
some immediate purpose .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. something that it was <span class='it'>imperative</span>
for him to do. As his eyes fixed themselves
upon the green hedge opposite him, he became aware,
through a small children-made gap, of the amazing gold
of the meadow beyond. Why, the field was full to the
very brim of golden buttercups! It was literally a floating
sea of liquid, shining gold!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He felt drawn towards the meadow by a bodily necessity,
as if he had been a sick dog seeking certain particular
grass-blades by the side of the road! Nothing at that
moment short of physical force could have prevented him
from climbing through that gap and entering that field.
In the stunned condition of his emotions, his actions were
obedient to the crude craving of that bodily necessity.
The automatic movements of his muscles necessary to
reach those yellow flowers followed one another with the
inevitableness of water seeking water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Once in the field, it was just as if he were wading
through golden waves. And then he suddenly remembered
that it was into this very field that he had flung
Mukalog. What a shining mausoleum for that little
demon!</p>

<p class='pindent'>He couldn’t resist the distraction of fumbling about at
random with his stick among the buttercup-stalks. What
if he <span class='it'>should</span> by some crazy chance, just at this juncture,
stumble upon the obscene idol? How would those long
weeks of exposure to the weather have affected it?</p>

<p class='pindent'>While all these notions were pursuing one another over
the surface of his mind, like criss-cross ripples over a
wharf-brimming tide, something else within him was
thinking: “In a few minutes I shall be entering that
parlour and shaking hands with Carfax. In a few more
minutes Carfax will have gone off to his train, and Gerda
and I will have been left alone.” He suddenly ceased
fumbling in that golden sea with the end of his stick.
There was nothing else for it but to take up, like a camel
with the last straw laid upon his hump, the swaying burden
of his life! “Carfax will probably stay over Sunday.
He’ll be infatuated. Her whistling will hold him like
sorcery. But on Monday he’ll take his train .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and I
shall go back to the School; and everything will be as
it was before.” But then he remembered the visitor’s
arrangement with Stalbridge—how the ex-waiter was to
meet the seven-o’clock train at Ramsgard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“No! By God, I believe he’ll clear off as he said!
He’s not a fellow to play fast and loose with a hired
servant.”</p>

<p class='pindent'>He began walking to and fro now, with a firmer step,
across that field. Back and forth he walked, while the sun,
fallen almost horizontal, made what he walked upon seem
unearthly. Buttercup-petals clung to his legs, clung to
the sides of his stick; buttercup-dust covered his boots.
The plenitude of gold that surrounded him began to
invade his mind with strange, far-drawn associations.
The golden ornaments, tissue upon tissue, leaf upon leaf,
covering the dead in the tomb of Agamemnon, the golden
pilasters of the halls of Alcinoüs, the golden shower that
ravished Danaë, the golden fleece that ruined Jason, the
cloud of gold in which the doomed Titan embraced Hera,
the flame of gold in which Zeus embraced Semele, the
golden fruit of the Hesperides, the golden sands of the
Islands of the Blest—all these things, not in their concrete
appearances, but in their Platonic essences, made
his mind reel. The thing became a symbol, a mystery,
an initiation. It was like that figure of the Absolute seen
in the Apocalypse. It became a <span class='it'>super-substance</span>, sunlight
precipitated and petrified, the magnetic heart of the world
rendered visible!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Up and down he went, pacing that field. He felt as if
he were an appointed emissary, guarding some fragment
of Saturn’s age flung into the midst of Blacksod!</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Enjoying the sweet light of the sun .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. deprived of
the sweet light of the sun,” these phrases from Homer
rang in his ears and seemed to express the only thing that
was important. Carfax taking Gerda upon his knee,
Urquhart begging Tilly-Valley for the Sacrament, his
mother borrowing from Mr. Manley, Roger Monk trimming
Redfern’s grave—all these human gestures presented
themselves to him now through a golden mist, a
mist that made them at once harmless and negligible,
compared with the difference between being alive and
being dead!</p>

<p class='pindent'>With his face turned westward, as he stared in his
march at the great orb of the horizontal sun, which by
reason of the thin screen of clouds that covered it was
no more dazzling to his eyes than the periphery of a full
moon, he realized that long ago, at Weymouth, he had
had an extraordinary ecstasy from the sight of the dancing
ripples of the wide bay turned into liquid gold by
the straight sun-path.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“Was it sunrise or sunset?” he wondered; but he
could not remember anything beyond that dance of gold
and the rapture it caused him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The deeper the enchantment of the moment sank into
his being, the clearer became his conclusion with regard
to the whole matter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the recesses of his consciousness he was aware that
a change had taken place within him, a rearrangement,
a readjustment of his ultimate vision, from which he
could never again altogether recede.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That sense of a supernatural struggle going on in the
abysses, with the Good and the Evil so sharply opposed,
had vanished from his mind. To the very core of life,
things were more involved, more complicated than that!
The supernatural itself had vanished from his mind. His
“mythology,” whatever it had been, <span class='it'>was dead</span>. What was
left to him now was his body. Like the body of a tree
or a fish or an animal it was; and his hands and his
knees were like branches or paws or fins! And floating
around his body, was his <span class='it'>thought</span>, the “I am I” against
the world. This “I am I” included his new purpose and
included his will toward his new purpose. “There is no
limit to the power of my will,” he thought, “as long as I
use it for two uses only .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. to forget and to enjoy!
Ha, old Truepenny, am I with you at last? Air and earth-mould,
clouds and a patch of grass, darkness and the
breaking of light .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Ay, it is enough! And with this as
my background, why can’t I be as heathenly ‘good’ as
Gaffer Barge? My will can do <span class='it'>anything</span>, when I limit it
to ‘forget .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. enjoy.’ ”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And there suddenly came upon him, as he thought of
these things, the memory of another blundering mystic,
another solitary walker over hill and dale, who in his
time, too, discovered that certain “Intimations of Immortality”
had to take a narrower, a simpler form, as the
years advanced!</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'>“But there’s a tree, of many one,</p>
<p class='line0'>A single Field which I have looked upon,</p>
<p class='line0'>Both of them spoke of something that is gone.”</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p class='pindent'>Increasingly as he stood there, quite motionless now,
did the golden sea around him clarify his thoughts. “I
must have the courage of my cowardice,” he thought.
“I can never be brave like you, old Truepenny; but I
can plough on and I can forget.” He dug the end of his
stick resolutely into the roots of the grass, into the
grave of Mukalog; and there slid into his mind an incident
from a visit he had paid long ago to Weymouth
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. <span class='it'>before Christie had ever gone there</span>.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was drinking tea alone, drinking it from a particular
china “set” belonging to his grandmother, a “set”
called Limoges. Beside him was a book with a little heap
of entangled bits of seaweed lying upon it, which he was
separating and sorting. There came a moment when he
suddenly realized that the book, beside which was his teacup
and upon which was the seaweed, was “The Poems of
Wordsworth.” A thrilling ecstasy shot through him then.
In a flash he associated the heightening of life that came
from his tea-drinking both with the magic of the floating
rock-pools where he had found the seaweed and with the
magic of Wordsworth’s fluctuating inspiration; and there
came upon him a sense of such incredible loveliness,
“interfused” through existence, that he jumped up from
his chair and began rapidly pacing the floor, hunching
his shoulders and rubbing his hands together.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That experience came back to his mind now. “If I can’t
enjoy life,” he thought, “with absolute childish absorption
in its simplest elements, I might as well never have
been born!”</p>

<p class='pindent'>And then there came over him a feeling that he could
never have expressed in definite words. It was as if an
intangible residuum of all the emanations from all the
places in town and country through which he had passed,
hovered about him now, like the sea-smell of those seaweeds
about that book!</p>

<p class='pindent'>From this feeling his mind reverted easily enough to
the thought of death. “Death, the sweet sleep; death, the
heavenly end,” he repeated. And as though the words
had been the burden of an old sentimental song, he felt
something within him respond to them with a melting
nostalgia.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then, as he turned eastward, and the yellowness of the
buttercups changed from Byzantine gold to Cimmerian
gold, he visualized the whole earthly solidity of this
fragment of the West Country, this segment of astronomical
clay, stretching from Glastonbury to Melbury Bub
and from Ramsgard to Blacksod, as if it were itself one
of the living personalities of his life. “It is a god!” he
cried in his heart; and he felt as if titanic hands, from
the horizon of this “field of Saturn,” were being lifted up
to salute the mystery of life and the mystery of death!</p>

<p class='pindent'>What he longed to do was to plunge his own hands
into this Saturnian gold, and to pour it out, over Mr.
Urquhart, over Mattie, over Miss Gault, over Jason, over
all the nameless little desolations—broken twigs, tortured
branches, wounded reptiles, injured birds, slaughtered
beasts—over a lonely stone, on which no moss grew,
in the heart of Lovelace park, over a drowned worm,
white and flaccid, dropped from the hook of Lobbie Torp
into some Lunt pool, over the death-pillow of old Mr.
Weevil, deprived now of his last conscious gluttony,
over the lechery of the “water-rat” himself, so pitiful in
its tantalized frustration! All .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. all .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. all would
reveal some unspeakable beauty, if only this Saturnian
gold were sprinkled upon them!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Reversing the position of his stick in his fingers as if
he scrupled to touch this golden sea with anything but
its handle, he did his best to turn this new clairvoyance
upon the knot of his own identity. Hardly knowing what
he was doing, he moved up close to the back of the pigsty;
and as he swung his stick by the wrong end, its handle
brushed the tall weeds that grew against the shed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“It’s my body that has saved me,” he thought; and as
if to assure these patient senses that his spirit was grateful,
he abstractedly pinched his thigh above the knee
with his left hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Behind the pigsty! It seemed to him odd that he had
lived here a whole year and had never seen this familiar
shed from the back. It was queer how he always shirked
reality, and then suddenly plunged—plunged into its inmost
retreat! Behind the pigsty! It was only when he got
desperate that he plunged into the nature of human beings—that
he got behind <span class='it'>them</span>!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ay! How coldly, how maliciously, he <span class='it'>could</span> dive into
the people he knew and see their inmost souls .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. from
behind, from behind! Poison and sting .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the furtive
coil and the sex-clutch; yes, a spasmodically jerking,
quivering ego-nerve, pursuing its own end—that was
what was behind everyone!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Behind the pigsty! How often had he visualized every
single person of his life, in some treachery of meanness!
How often had he caught them in some incredible
posture of grotesque indecency! Oh, it was his own mind
that was diseased .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. not Nature. Well, diseased or not,
it was all he had! Henceforth he was going to take as the
talisman of his days the phrase <span class='it'>endure or escape</span>. Where
had he picked up that phrase? Behind a workhouse? Behind
a madhouse?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Between himself and what was “behind” the Universe
there should be now a new covenant! The Cause up
there could certainly at any minute make him howl like
a mad dog. It could make him dance and skip and eat
dung. Well, until it <span class='it'>did</span> that, he was going to endure
.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. follow his “road,” through the ink-stains, and
endure!</p>

<p class='pindent'>His eye happened to catch sight of a large grey snail
with its horns extended, ascending the tarred boards of
the shed. It had just left a pallid dock-leaf that spread
itself out against the boarding, and to which its slime still
adhered. His mind rushed off to thousands and thousands
of quiet spots, behind outhouses, behind stick-houses,
behind old haystacks, behind old barns and sheds,
where such grey snails lived and died in peace, covering
docks, nettles, and silver-weed with their patent slime!
How often had he hurried past such places with hardly a
glance! And yet their combined memory reconciled him
more to life than all Roger Monk’s flower-beds.</p>

<p class='pindent'>By God! He must be crafty in dealing with these
modern inventions! He must slide under them, over them,
round them, like air, like vapour, like water. <span class='it'>Endure or
escape!</span> A good word, wherever it was he had picked
it up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Well, never mind the motors and the aeroplanes! King
Æthelwolf was at rest, staring up at that fan-tracery. It
only needed an adjustment .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and he could be as much
at peace in life as that king was in death!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Was Carfax making love to Gerda now, all soft and
yielding and relaxed, after her whistling?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Everyone had to <span class='it'>feel</span> according to the fatality of his
nature; but who was he to make pompous moral scenes?</p>

<p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Alone!</span> That was what he had learnt from the hard
woman who had given him birth. That every soul was
alone. Alone with that secret bestower of torture and
pleasure, the horned snail behind the pigsty!</p>

<p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Endure or escape.</span> He must spread the wisdom of that
word over all the miserable moments that were to come.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Oh, Christie! Oh, Christie!</p>

<p class='pindent'>Well, he must go in and face those two now.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He took up his stick firmly and securely by its proper
end, and for a few paces moved forward blinking, straight
into the circle of the sun, as it aimed itself at him over
the rim of the world. Then he swung round, scrambled
through the gap, and hurried across the road.</p>

<p class='pindent'>“I wonder if he <span class='it'>is</span> still here?” he thought as he laid
his hand on the latch of the gate. And then he thought,
“Well, I shall have a cup of tea.”</p>
